     The "1999 Seattle WTO protests", sometimes referred to as the "Battle of Seattle", were a series of protests surrounding the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999, when members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) convened at the Washington State Convention and Trade Center in Seattle, Washington (state)|Washington on November 30, 1999. The Conference was to be the launch of a new millennial round of trade negotiations. The negotiations were quickly overshadowed by massive street protests outside the hotels and the Washington State Convention and Trade Center. The protests were nicknamed ""N30"", akin to Carnival Against Capitalism|J18 and similar mobilizations, and were deemed controversial by the media. The large scale of the demonstrations, estimated at no fewer than 40,000 protesters, dwarfed any previous demonstration in the United States against a world meeting of any of the organizations generally associated with economic globalization, such as the WTO, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank."Police estimated the size of this march  in excess of 40,000." ==Organizations and planning== Planning for the actions began months in advance and included local, national, and international organizations. Among the most notable participants were national and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) such as Global ExchangeBogardus, Keven (September 22, 2004).   Center for Public Integrity. Retrieved February 22, 2010. (especially those concerned with labor issues, the environment, and consumer protection), labor unions (including the AFL–CIO), student groups, religion-based groups (Jubilee 2000), and anarchism|anarchists (some of whom formed a black bloc). , Wendy McElroy. About market, violence, and anarchist reject to WTO. The protests also drew support from some political conservatives, such as American presidential candidate and commentator Pat Buchanan. The coalition was loose, with some opponent groups focused on opposition to WTO policies (especially those related to free trade), with others motivated by prolabor, anticapitalist, or environmental agendas.  Many of the NGOs represented at the protests came with credentials to participate in the official meetings, while also planning various educational and press events. The AFL–CIO, with cooperation from its member unions, organized a large permitted rally and march from Seattle Center to Downtown, Seattle, Washington|downtown. File:WTO protestors, 1999 (20680767813).jpg|thumb|left|The "turtles": protestors in sea turtle costumes However, others were more interested in taking direct action, including both civil disobedience and acts of vandalism and property destruction to disrupt the meeting. Several groups were loosely organized together under the Direct Action Network (DAN), with a plan to disrupt the meetings by blocking streets and intersections downtown to prevent delegates from reaching the convention center, where the meeting was to be held. The black bloc was not affiliated with DAN, but was responding to the original call for autonomous resistance actions on November 30 issued by Peoples Global Action|People's Global Action. Of the different coalitions that aligned in protest were the "teamsters and turtles" – a blue–green alliance consisting of the teamsters (trade unions) and environmentalists.Berg, John C. 2003, "Teamsters and Turtles?: U.S. Progressive Political Movements in the 21st Century", Rowman & Littlefield  Certain activists, including locals and an additional group of anarchists from Eugene, Oregon (where they had gathered that summer for a music festival), advocated more confrontational tactics, and conducted vandalism of corporate property|properties in downtown Seattle. In a subsequent communique, they listed the particular corporations targeted, which they considered to have committed corporate crime.  On July 12, the "Financial Times" reported that the latest United Nations Human Development report advocated "principles of performance for multinationals on labour standards, fair trade and environmental protection ... needed to counter the negative effects of globalisation on the poorest nations". The report itself argued, "An essential aspect of global governance is responsibility to people—to equity, to justice, to enlarging the choices of all".  UNHDR, 1999 On July 16, Helene Cooper of "The Wall Street Journal" warned of an impending "massive mobilization against globalization" being planned for the end-of-year Seattle WTO conference.  Next day, the London "The Independent|Independent" newspaper savaged the WTO and appeared to side with the organizers of the rapidly developing storm of protest: <blockquote>The way it has used  powers is leading to a growing suspicion that its initials should really stand for World Take Over. In a series of rulings it has struck down measures to help the world's poor, protect the environment, and safeguard health in the interests of private—usually American—companies. "The WTO seems to be on a crusade to increase private profit at the expense of all other considerations, including the well-being and quality of life of the mass of the world's people," says Ronnie Hall, trade campaigner at Friends of the Earth International. "It seems to have a relentless drive to extend its power."  Sunday Independent, 17 July 1999</blockquote> On November 16, two weeks before the conference, President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13141—Environmental Review of Trade Agreements, which committed the United States to a policy of "assessment and consideration of the environmental impacts of trade agreements" and stated, "Trade agreements should contribute to the broader goal of sustainable development." File:Anarchists at WTO protest (14988709689).jpg|thumbnail|upright=1.2|Black bloc organizing during WTO protests Activists staged a spoof of Seattle daily newspaper the "Seattle Post-Intelligencer|Post-Intelligencer" on Wednesday November 24, inserting thousands of hoax editions of a four-page front-page wrap-around into piles of newspapers awaiting distribution to hundreds of street boxes and retail outlets. The spoof front-page stories were "Boeing to move overseas" (to Indonesia) and "Clinton pledges help for poorest nations".Parvaz D "" "Seattle Post-Intelligencer", November 25, 1999 The byline on the Boeing story attributed it to Joe Hill (activist)|Joe Hill (a union organizer who had been executed by firing squad in Utah in 1915). On the same day, the International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development reported: <blockquote>developing countries have remained steadfast in their demand that developed countries honour Uruguay Round commitments before moving forward full force with new trade negotiations. Specifically, developing countries are concerned over developed countries' compliance with agreements on market access for textiles, their use of antidumping measures against developing countries' exports, and over-implementation of the WTO Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs)." "ICTSD "Bridges Weekly" Seattle 99, Vol 3 No 46, November 24, 1999</blockquote> ==N30== File:WTO protests.jpg|thumb|Seattle police on Union Street, during the protests On the morning of Tuesday, November 30, 1999, the DAN's plan was put into effect. Several hundred activists arrived in the deserted streets near the convention center and began to take control of key intersections. Over the next few hours, a number of marchers began to converge on the area from different directions. These included a student march from the north, a march of citizens of the developing world who marched in from the south and, beginning around 09:00, militant anarchists (in a formation known as a black bloc) marching down Pike Street from 6th Avenue, blockading the streets with newspaper boxes and smashing windows. Some demonstrators held rallies, others held teach-ins and at least one group staged an early-morning street party. Meanwhile, a number of protesters still controlled the intersections using lockdown formations. File:Anti-WTO-Protest-Earth-flag.svg|thumb|Flag used by some protestors That morning, the King County Sheriff's Office and Seattle Police Department fired pepper spray, tear gas canisters, and stun grenades at protesters at several intersections in an attempt to reopen the blocked streets and allow as many WTO delegates as possible through the blockade.Draft King Country Sheriff's Office Final Report, II.H.2.<br />WTO Accountability Review Committee ...
