    | status = Inactive | began = October 1, 2001 | genre = Slice-of-life, surreal humor | ratings =  }} ""Achewood"" is a webcomic created by Chris Onstad in 2001. It portrays the lives of a group of anthropomorphism|anthropomorphic stuffed toys, robots, and pets. Many of the characters live together in the home of their owner, Chris, at the fictional address of 62 Achewood Court. The events of the strip mostly take place in, and around the house, as well as around the town of Achewood, the Fiction|fictional suburb which gives its name to the Comics|comic. The comic's humor is most often absurdism|absurdist, typically lacking a traditional set Punch line|punchline, and very often moves to the highly surreal humor|surreal. The world of the strip is expansive, featuring many major and minor characters with detailed backstories, and often references previous events, making it an ongoing narrative. As Onstad is a food and cooking enthusiast, many "Achewood" strips contain some reference to food or drink. Originally published regularly, the comic began to skip days in late 2010, and in March 2011 Onstad announced that "Achewood" would be going on an indefinite hiatus.. March 20, 2011. "Chris Onstad's blog". In November 2011 the comic returned, followed by an announcement in December that the hiatus was over. However, Chris Onstad has stated that no regular schedule will be in effect, and new strips have been sporadic. Onstad indicated in 2012 his plans for pitching "Achewood" as an animated series. No further news has come on this front, and the comic itself was not updated between April 7, 2014, and December 24, 2015. The strip returned on December 24, 2015, and was updated most subsequent Fridays. On December 25, 2016, Onstad announced that the strip was again on hiatus. ==History and overview== The first "Achewood" strip ("Philippe is standing on it", 1 October 2001, "Achewood") was released on October 1, 2001. The strip sets the tone for future strips with its nonsensical humor and flat visual punchline. In this particular strip, #Cornelius Bear|Mr. Bear and #Téodor Orezscu|Téodor are discussing Téodor's confusion over a drum machine. Mr. Bear informs Téodor that there is an instruction manual. However, #Philippe|Philippe is standing on it. Throughout "Achewood", there is no distinguishable underlying storyline—aside from, perhaps, the general passing of time and development of the comic's characters and their interrelationships. Onstad's preferred method of story telling is to develop his characters through one-off strips and short story arcs. Strips are humorous, relying upon bizarre and chaotic humor as well as social stereotypes; obscure, burlesque literary and historical references, and strong characterization of the comic's many quirky individuals. The humor often depends on an in-depth knowledge of the characters and their interactions; a drop-down box on the lower right side of the home page links to the beginning of 46 story arcs from 2002 to 2010. Story arcs are often interrupted as the main action "cuts away" to the activity of other "Achewood" characters, which may or may not tie in with the main storyline. Most strips include an alt text, a one-sentence aside written in Onstad's voice that appears when the reader hovers the cursor over the strip. The first alt-text was the word "snif" on Christmas, 2001. The first of the regular full-sentence alt-text appeared on January 2, 2002, apparently excusing a weak strip: "whatever. it was late and a friend was over." The most frequently used font in the strip is Highway Gothic|Blue Highway, which does not contain any italic characters. Chris Onstad has self-published #Bibliography|sixteen books: seven collections of "Achewood" comics, two books by character Nice Pete ("A Wonderful Tale" and "A Hilarious Comedy"), six zine|'zines by another named Roast Beef, and "Recipes for a Lady or a Man: The Achewood Cookbook" with recipes from several of the main characters. A second cookbook, titled "The Achewood Cookbook II" was announced and paid pre-orders were taken, but it never shipped. In October 2002, "Achewood" "Sunday Edition" became part of the online alternative comics anthology Serializer. In their review of serializer.net, "The Comics Journal" wrote: "It's a pleasure to see strips like Achewood's 'Sunday' strip&nbsp;... use the newspaper format for far more daring, entertainingly perverse work&nbsp;... would be perfectly at home at a good alternative weekly or a great college paper." "Achewood" is sometimes featured in the "Stanford Chaparral|Chaparral", Stanford University's humor publication, of which Onstad is an editor emeritus. On April 30, 2003, Onstad introduced a new feature to the "Achewood" universe—an advice column written by the character #Raymond Quentin Smuckles|Ray called "Ray's Place". The column has developed characters, mainly as perceived by Ray.  It also allows for an interaction between reader and character, a novelty in comic art. July 2004 saw the introduction of several in-character blogs. The main characters all began writing (using blogger.com|Blogger) to speak to their audience. Onstad stated in an interview that he found the blogs easier to maintain than the strip, as they do not require as much refining. In late 2004, it was announced that Checker Book Publishing Group was to release a collection of "Achewood" comics later that year.Perigar, Mark A. (13 August 2004). "Checker-ed Past; Publisher keeps vintage, beloved works in print". "The Boston Herald". The Edge; Pg. e35 Checker had signed Chris Onstad to a three-book deal that was to begin in November 2004. However, the deal was canceled soon after due to creative differences. On September 12, 2007, "Achewood" was named "Funniest Webcomic" by humor website Cracked.com. Onstad participated in Song Fight! by creating cover art and title for "What We Need More of is Science", "Red Skates", and "Livin' at the Corner of Dude and Catastrophe". The first title originated as a Roast Beef expression on merchandise. One Song Fight! entry was performed by the , who also wrote and recorded a theme for "Ray's Place", Ray's advice column. An entry by MC Frontalot won the latest Song Fight! and is now the current theme song for the comic. "Time (magazine)|Time" magazine named "Achewood" its #1 graphic novel of 2007. On September 10, 2008, Dark Horse Comics published a 104-page extended version of "The Great Outdoor Fight" story arc, with a deleted scene, background material on the fight and other original content. As the strip has developed, individual comics have become generally longer, moving from three to four panels on a single line per comic to large comics incorporating dozens of panels on ten or more lines. Dark Horse has subsequently published, in October 2009, the first several years of "Achewood" comics under the title of "Achewood Volume Two: Worst Song, Played On Ugliest Guitar", including notes on each strip by Onstad. }}  A third volume,  "Achewood Volume Three: A Home For Scared People", was published in December 2010 and contains strips up to the end of October 2002. The regular appearance of new comics slowed considerably in late 2010. On March 20, 2011, Onstad posted on his blog that "Achewood" would be on an indefinite hiatus. Between November 2011, and June 2012, Onstad posted comics on an erratic basis, with up to four comics per month, then resumed regular, weekly new comics from August 2013 to April 7, 2014. Onstad resumed posting comics on December 24, 2015, with the first new strip in 20 months, and continued to update the site on most subsequent Fridays throughout 2016. On December 25, 2016, Onstad announced that he was "walking away" from the strip and that it would be entering another extended hiatus period.  According to the comic's official website, "achewood" was an ingredient used by enslaved people during the United States' antebellum era in the production of "achewater", a now outlawed Southern drink with psychedelic properties, similar to the use of absinthe wormwood|wormwood in the production of absinthe. This liquor would supposedly induce melancholia in the drinker, hence the name.  The Achewood Underground is an underground version of the human city above, inhabited and run by animals both stuffed and real, as well as several robots. The Underground has its own businesses and establishments that parallel those above ground, and its inhabitants often steal or borrow things from their human counterparts above ground. Aside from Achewood, it is assumed that most cities around the world have their own undergrounds as well., 10 October 2003, "Achewood"  The geography of the Achewood Overground, 3 January 2005, "Achewood" is based on that of the Palo Alto, California|Palo Alto/Stanford, California|Stanford area. Dexter University corresponds to Stanford University, Achewood Heights is equivalent to Menlo Park, California|Menlo Park, East Achewood is analogous to East Palo Alto, California|East Palo Alto, and the Achewood Estates/Achewood areas refer to areas of Palo Alto. ==Major characters==    Raymond Quentin "Ray" Smuckles, June 25, 2007, "Achewood" is a cat, specifically, an American Curl, a breed that originated from Lakewood, California. Ray is financially successful after selling his soul to the devil in exchange for success in pop music. He claims to have expertise in such diverse fields as cooking|cookery, alcohol, underground street dancing, piano playing, entrepreneurship, and woman|women. Ray made his first appearance on January 10, 2002. Along with his best friend Roast Beef, Ray has become the central character of the strip; their relationship lies at the heart of "Achewood". Ray can be identified by his designer glasses, his habitual wearing of a G-string|thong since the January 14, 2002, strip,, January 14, 2002, "Achewood" the occasional fur coat, and a gold medallion which once belonged to the fictitious Incan god of fun, "King Chochacho"., June 1, 2005, "Achewood" Ray often speaks of his heritage: his mother's family, the Culpeppers, are French Catholic Southern gentry, while his fathers, the Smuckles, are a diverse collection of tough, philosophical underworld characters (more below). Ray tends to be rather lucky, acquiring money in a variety of ways, including a record contract with Sony (after selling his soul to the devil for a piano that grants the buyer musical genius, November 4, 2002, "Achewood"), an auspicious eBay's purchase of vintage erotica valued at 600 million dollars, and various business ventures. Ray is the founder, president, and CEO of Prime Time Records, which releases mostly rap music. Through eBay Platinum Reserve, he now owns "Airwolf (helicopter)|Airwolf", Keith Moon's head, and the world's biggest laser. He enjoys throwing lavish parties with unusual themes. Ray drives a Cadillac Escalade. He is very generous to his friends and to people in general, but on an entirely random basis and interspersed with long periods of outright rudeness and total insensitivity. He also has a very serious obsession with Ketel One and Zinfandel alcohols. Although Ray personally obtained his musical skills from a deal with the devil, there has been a ...
