 The "Fairy with Turquoise Hair" (; often simply referred to as "The Blue Fairy", "La Fata Turchina") is a fictional character in the 1883 Italian book "The Adventures of Pinocchio" by Carlo Collodi, repeatedly appearing at critical moments in Pinocchio's wanderings to admonish the little wooden puppet to avoid bad or risky behavior. Although the naïvely willful marionette initially resists her good advice, he later comes to follow her instruction. She in turn protects him, and later enables his assumption of human form, contrary to the prior wooden form. == In the novel == File:Le avventure di Pinocchio-pag103.jpg|thumb|left|145px|Pinocchio refuses to take the medicine prompting the Fairy to summon a group of funeral directors rabbits to take him. The Fairy with Turquoise Hair makes her first appearance in chapter XV, where she is portrayed as a young girl living in a house in the middle of a forest. Pinocchio, who is being chased by The Fox and the Cat ("Il Gatto e la Volpe"), pleads with the Fairy to allow him entrance. The Fairy cryptically responds that all inhabitants of the house, including herself, are dead, and that she is waiting for her coffin to arrive. The pair catches and hangs Pinocchio from a tree. In the following chapter, it is established that the girl is a fairy who has lived in the forest for more than a thousand years. She takes pity on Pinocchio, and sends a falcon to take him down from the tree and for her poodle servant Medoro to prep her stagecoach.  File:Le avventure di Pinocchio-pag107.jpg|thumb|left|135px|Your nose starts to lengthen, due to your lies. After a visit from three doctors consisting of an Owl, a Corvus (genus)|Crow, and the Talking Cricket ("Il Grillo Parlante"), the Fairy attempts to give Pinocchio medicine in order to heal his injuries. Pinocchio refuses to take the medicine on account of its sour taste, prompting the Fairy to summon a group of coffin-bearing Funeral director|undertaker rabbits. Frightened by this display, Pinocchio drinks the medicine, and later tells the Fairy of his previous adventures. When he includes untruths, his nose begins to lengthen, which the Fairy explains is due to his lies. She summons a group of woodpeckers to shorten the disproportionate nose, and after forgiving Pinocchio, informs him that he is free to consider her an elder sister, and that his father Mister Geppetto is on his way to fetch him. In his impatience, Pinocchio leaves the house in an way, but instead of finding it he went to the field of miracles with the fox and the cat. File:Le avventure di Pinocchio-pag143.jpg|thumb|right|140px| Only find a tombstone declaring "The Fairy died believing that Pinocchio had abandoned her". After spending some time in the Catchfools prison, Pinocchio returns to the Fairy's house only to find a tombstone declaring that the Fairy died believing that Pinocchio had abandoned her. In the following chapter, Pinocchio is transported to the Island of Busy Bees ("Isola delle Api Industriose"), where he meets the Fairy, now older, disguised as an ordinary woman. Unaware of the deception, Pinocchio offers to carry buckets of water to her house in exchange for a meal. After eating, Pinocchio recognizes the Fairy's turquoise hair. The Fairy agrees to adopt him as her son, and promises to turn him into a real boy, provided he earns it through hard study and obedience for one year. Later, she reveals to Pinocchio that his days of puppethood are almost over, and that she will organize a celebration in his honour; but Pinocchio is convinced by his friend, Candlewick (character)|Candlewick ("Lucignolo") to go for Land of Toys ("Paese dei Balocchi") a place who the boys don't have anything besides play. In the midnight they are taken on a wagon by The Coachman. File:Le avventure di Pinocchio-pag264.jpg|thumb|left|140px|Assumes the shape of a mountain goat, the Fairy warns Pinocchio about the imminent arrival of The Terrible Dogfish. Five months later, Pinocchio is transformed into a donkey and be sold to a circus ringleader to jump, dance and bow. In the middle of the show he sees the fairy in the audience, she wore a long gold chain, from which hung a large medallion with an image of a puppet. Pinocchio became lame and was sold to a musician to make a drum and later thrown into the sea by his handler. Where upon the Fairy sends a shoal of fish to consume his donkey's appearance until he is returned to his puppet form. Taking the form of a blue-furred mountain goat, the Fairy warns Pinocchio of the impending arrival of The Terrible Dogfish, but is unsuccessful. It is revealed in chapter XXXVI that she gives a house to the Talking Cricket (who offers to accommodate both Pinocchio and the sickly Geppetto) while she was in the form of the blue-furred mountain goat. The Fairy becomes ill too, so Pinocchio gives some of the money he's earned to her snail to give to her. She finally appears to Pinocchio in a dream, gives the boy a kiss, and commends him for having taken care of his ailing father and herself. Upon awakening, Pinocchio has become human, and all his copper coins have turned to gold, accompanied by a note from the Fairy professing her responsibility. ==In adaptations==  In Walt Disney's "Pinocchio (1940 film)|Pinocchio", the Fairy (voiced by Evelyn Venable) is referred to as "The Blue Fairy", and is one of the four leading protagonists in the film. It is she who brings Pinocchio to life and appoints Jiminy Cricket as Pinocchio's conscience. She is depicted with blonde hair and blue eyes, rather than the turquoise hair and black eyes of her book counterpart. In this case, the "blue" in her name refers to her eyes and her gown. The Blue Fairy also makes an appearance (played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus) in the TV musical "Geppetto (TV musical)|Geppetto". Voiced by Rosalyn Landor, the fairy appears as a guest at the titular night club in "Disney's House of Mouse". In "Teacher's Pet (2004 film)|Teacher's Pet", voiced again by Landor, she helps Spot Helperman realize his dreams to pose as a boy. She appears in "Kingdom Hearts 3D: Dream Drop Distance" voiced by Miyuki Ichijo in the Japanese version and reprised by Landor in the English dub. Just like the film, the Blue Fairy explains to Pinocchio about the side effects of his lies to Jiminy Cricket. She later tells Sora (Kingdom Hearts)|Sora (voiced by Miyu Irino and Haley Joel Osment) that Geppetto was swallowed by Monstro and that Pinocchio and Jiminy went to go rescue him. The Blue Fairy (voiced by Grey DeLisle) also makes a cameo in the "Disappearing Act" episode of "The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse". The Blue Fairy is portrayed by Cynthia Erivo in the 2022 Pinocchio (2022 live-action film)|live-action/CGI remake of the animated film, making her the first black actress to play the role. Unlike the original film, the Blue Fairy appears only once where she brings him to life.  Image:La fata turchina.jpg|thumb|The Fairy with Turquoise Hair, as portrayed in Giuliano Cenci's 1972 film "The Adventures of Pinocchio (1972 film)|The Adventures of Pinocchio" In Giuliano Cenci's 1972 animated film "The Adventures of Pinocchio (1972 film)|The Adventures of Pinocchio", the Fairy (voiced by Vittoria Febbi with Martha Scott doing her English-voice dub) is portrayed much more accurately to the book than she is in the Disney adaptation. She has no role in creating Pinocchio, though she does offer him guidance and support. Though she is accurately portrayed as sporting blue hair, she does not physically age as she does in the book.  File:Gina Lollobrigida Fata Turchina.jpg|thumb|upright|Gina Lollobrigida as The Fairy with Turquoise Hair in the TV series "The Adventures of Pinocchio (1972 miniseries)|The Adventures of Pinocchio" (1972) In 1972's Italian miniseries "The Adventures of Pinocchio (1972 miniseries)|The Adventures of Pinocchio", she is played by Gina Lollobrigida. Her role is similar to the book, with the difference that she is really the ghost of Geppetto's deceased wife. The Fairy appears in the 1972 TV series "Pinocchio: The Series|Saban's The Adventures of Pinocchio" is referred to as "Oak Fairy" and is resident of oak tree from which Pinocchio was created. She acts as Pinocchio's guidance and offers advice to help Pinocchio when he is in a difficult situation. In last episode Oak Fairy, proud of dead Pinocchio's courage and kindness, brings him back to life as a real boy. After this, the fairy leaves him, saying that from now on he must take care of himself. Pinocchio calls her his godmother. In 1976's West German-Austrian-Japanese animated series "Piccolino no Bōken|Pinocchio", the role of Fairy is the same like in the book although she does not physically age and stays as a young woman. She acts as a motherly figure and teacher to Pinocchio and gets to rescue him from harm several times. After Pinocchio finds her tombstone instead of her house she appears later in different forms including a giant pigeon. Eventually, as a reward to Pinocchio's good deeds, the fairy decides to transform him into a real boy. In the 1987 film "Pinocchio and the Emperor of the Night", the "Good Fairy" (voiced by Rickie Lee Jones) appears as Pinocchio's guide. In the beginning she arrives at his birthday party and brings to life his glowworm, which he names Gee Willikers. Later, she brings him back to life after he has been turned back into a puppet by Puppetino and tells him to make the right choices. After the defeat of the Emperor, she restores Pinocchio, brings back Geppetto's jewel box which had been stolen earlier, and brings Twinkle, a girl who had been turned into a puppet, back to life. In the 1992 direct-to-video adaptation by GoodTimes Entertainment, the Blue Fairy (voiced by Jeannie Elias) is portrayed more like her Disney counterpart with blonde hair instead of turquoise. She is soft-spoken and sweet. The Blue Fairy is also a motherly figure to Pinocchio and guides him. She also has a broken heart when she realizes that Pinocchio is swallowed by a whale, but Pinocchio becomes good and repays her kindness by doing the good things. In the 1996 film "The Adventures of Pinocchio (1996 film)|The Adventures of Pinocchio", the character of Leona (played by Geneviève Bujold) serves as the Blue Fairy's stand-in in the film. She is a beloved and long-time friend of Geppetto with whom he is secretly in love - a love which is actually mutual, despite her having previously married his late brother (similar to the 1972's Italian miniseries of a similar name). In "Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child", the Fairy is actually called the "Blues Fairy" (voiced by Della Reese) and is like her Disney counterpart who tells Pinocchio, aka Pinoak, what is right and what is wrong. In Steven Spielberg's 2001 movie "A.I.: Artificial Intelligence" (2001), the Blue Fairy (voiced by Meryl Streep) appears as a plot MacGuffin. The main character David (played by Haley Joel Osment, who also voices Sora in the "Kingdom Hearts" example above), a robotic child believes that the Blue Fairy has the power to turn him into a real boy. It also appears in the form of the Coney Island statue of the Blue Fairy which David mistakes for a real blue fairy. In "Buratino", the Russian adaptation of "Pinocchio", there is a female character with blue hair named Malvina. In Roberto Benigni's "Pinocchio (2002 film)|Pinocchio", the Blue Fairy is portrayed by Italian actress Nicoletta Braschi with her English-dubbed voice provided by Glenn Close. Angelica the Blue Fairy is the antagonist in the Japanese/Australian stage show "Once Upon a Midnight." "The Blue Fairy" was a 1950s' children's program on WGN-TV in Chicago, hosted by Brigid Bazlen as the fairy. In a 1997 article for the "Miami New Times", reporter Lynda Edwards describes hearing modern urban legends from Miami's homeless children, who cope with their situation by invoking Latino and Afro-Cuban legends including the image of "the pale blue lady" or blue fairy. Derived from the Catholic legend of the Blessed Mother leading a spiritual army of angels, the Blue Lady protects the children from poverty-related terrors, against the minions of a vengeful La Llorona. In the 2012 Italian animated film Pinocchio (2012 film)|Pinocchio, the Fairy seems as young as Pinocchio and shows a sense of humour. As on many versions, she forgives him and encourages him to do good. She restores him from his donkey form to puppet form, and also turns him to a real boy for risking his life for Gepetto.  In the Vertigo (DC Comics)|Vertigo comic series "Fables (comics)|Fables", she appears as a List of Fables characters#The Blue Fairy|blue-haired fairy who makes Pinocchio (Fables)|Pinocchio into a (never-aging) boy. Actress Keegan Connor Tracy plays the Blue Fairy in American Broadcasting Company|ABC's "Once Upon a Time (TV series)|Once Upon a Time". In the series, the residents of Storybrooke, Maine are former fairytale characters with their memories wiped by a curse cast by the Evil Queen (Disney)|Evil Queen from the tale of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)|Snow White". The good fairies from the fairytale world are transformed into the nuns of Storybrooke's local convent, with the Blue Fairy as Abbess|Mother Superior. Her history with Pinocchio is still intact, but is also shown to have histories with Tinker Bell, Tiger Lily (Peter Pan)|Tiger Lily, and Fiona the Black Fairy. In the live-action Italian film "Pinocchio (2019 film)|Pinocchio" (2019), co-written, directed and co-produced by Matteo Garrone, the Fairy is port ...
