 "Albert F. Sabo" (December 21, 1920 – May 8, 2002) was an American lawyer and judge of the Philadelphia County, Pennsylvania|Philadelphia County Pennsylvania Courts of Common Pleas|Court of Common Pleas. He is best known for presiding over the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Mumia Abu-Jamal|1982 murder trial of Mumia Abu-Jamal. Sabo served as a judge from 1974 until his retirement in 1998. Born in Philadelphia, Sabo grew up in the Northern Liberties, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania|Northern Liberties neighborhood and graduated from Roman Catholic High School (Philadelphia)|Roman Catholic High School in 1938. He earned two degrees from the University of Pennsylvania: a bachelor's degree in economics from the Wharton School in 1942 and a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania Law School in 1948. Sabo was a World War II veteran and part of the United States Army Air Forces. For 15 years while on the bench, Sabo exclusively heard homicide cases. Sabo presided over 31 cases that resulted in the imposition of the Capital punishment in the United States|death penalty, which was reported in 1992 by "The Philadelphia Inquirer" to be the most in the state. In 1995, in the time before Abu-Jamal was scheduled to be executed, Sabo had 24-hour security due to angry, offensive faxes and calls directed to him. On September 15, 1995, Sabo denied Abu-Jamal a retrial. In 2000, the stenographer at the Abu-Jamal trial, Terri Maurer-Carter, signed an affidavit stating that during the trial she overheard the judge saying of the defendant, "Yeah and I'm gonna help 'em fry the nigger." Sabo died in 2002 of heart failure. At the time of his death, he was living in the Mount Airy, Philadelphia|Mount Airy neighborhood of Philadelphia. ==References==    Category:1920 births Category:2002 deaths Category:Mumia Abu-Jamal Category:United States Army personnel of World War II Category:Lawyers from Philadelphia Category:United States Army officers Category:University of Pennsylvania Law School alumni Category:Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania alumni Category:Judges of the Pennsylvania Courts of Common Pleas 
