   <!-- Definition and symptoms --> "Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency" ("A1AD" or "AATD") is a genetic disorder that may result in lung disease or liver disease. Onset of lung problems is typically between 20 and 50 years of age. This may result in shortness of breath, wheezing, or an increased risk of lung infections. Complications may include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cirrhosis, neonatal jaundice, or panniculitis. <!-- Cause and diagnosis --> A1AD is due to a mutation in the SERPINA1 gene that results in not enough alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT). Risk factors for lung disease include tobacco smoking and Dust|environmental dust. The underlying mechanism involves unblocked neutrophil elastase and buildup of abnormal A1AT in the liver. It is autosomal co-dominant, meaning that one defective allele tends to result in milder disease than two defective alleles. The diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and confirmed by blood tests or genetic tests. <!-- Treatment and prognosis --> Treatment of lung disease may include bronchodilators, inhaled steroids, and, when infections occur, antibiotics. Intravenous infusions of the A1AT protein or in severe disease lung transplantation may also be recommended. In those with severe liver disease liver transplantation may be an option. Avoiding smoking is recommended. Vaccination for influenza vaccine|influenza, pneumococcus vaccine|pneumococcus, and hepatitis is also recommended. Life expectancy among those who smoke is 50 years while among those who do not smoke it is almost normal. <!-- Epidemiology --> The condition affects about 1 in 2,500 people of European descent. Severe deficiency occurs in about 1 in 5,000. In Asians it is uncommon. About 3% of people with COPD are believed to have the condition. Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency was first described in the 1960s. == Signs and symptoms == Individuals with A1AD may develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (emphysema) during their thirties or forties even without a history of Tobacco smoking|smoking, though smoking greatly increases the risk. Symptoms may include dyspnea|shortness of breath (on exertion and later at rest), Wheeze|wheezing, and sputum production. Symptoms may resemble recurrent respiratory infections or asthma. A1AD may cause several manifestations associated with liver disease, which include impaired liver function and cirrhosis. In newborns, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can result in early onset jaundice followed by prolonged jaundice. Between 3% and 5% of children with ZZ mutations develop life-threatening liver disease, including liver failure. A1AD is a leading reason for liver transplantation in newborns. In newborns and children, A1AD may cause jaundice, poor feeding, poor weight gain, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. File:Conditions associated with Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.png|thumb|upright=1.3|Conditions associated with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, occurring due to paucity of AAT in circulation allowing uninhibited inflammation in lungs, and accumulation of mutated AAT in the liver Apart from COPD and chronic liver disease, α<sub>1</sub>-antitrypsin deficiency has been associated with necrotizing panniculitis (a skin condition) and with granulomatosis with polyangiitis in which inflammation of the blood vessels may affect a number of organs but predominantly the lungs and the kidneys. ==Genetics== Serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade A, member 1 ("SERPINA1") is the gene that encodes the protein alpha-1 antitrypsin.  "SERPINA1" has been localized to chromosome 14q32.  Over 75 mutations of the "SERPINA1" gene have been identified, many with clinically significant effects. The most common cause of severe deficiency, PiZ, is a single base-pair substitution leading to a glutamic acid to lysine mutation at position 342 (dbSNP: rs28929474), while PiS is caused by a glutamic acid to valine mutation at position 264 (dbSNP: rs17580). Other rarer forms have been described . == Pathophysiology == File:Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.PAS Diastase.jpg|thumb|Photomicrograph of a liver biopsy from a patient with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. The PAS with diastase stain shows the diastase-resistant pink globules that are characteristic of this disease.  A1AT is a glycoprotein mainly produced in the liver by hepatocytes, and, in some quantity, by enterocytes, monocytes, and macrophages. In a healthy lung, it functions as an inhibitor against neutrophil elastase, a neutral serine protease that controls lung elastolytic activity which stimulates mucus secretion and CXCL8 release from epithelial cells that perpetuate the inflammatory state. With A1AT deficiency, neutrophil elastase can disrupt elastin and components of the alveolar wall of the lung that may lead to emphysema, and hypersecretion of mucus can develop chronic bronchitis. Both conditions are the makeup of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Normal blood levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin may vary with analytical method but are typically around 1.0-2.7 g/L.  In individuals with PiSS, PiMZ and PiSZ genotypes, blood levels of A1AT are reduced to between 40 and 60% of normal levels; this is usually sufficient to protect the lungs from the effects of elastase in people who do not smoke. However, in individuals with the PiZZ genotype, A1AT levels are less than 15% of normal, and they are likely to develop panlobular emphysema at a young age. Cigarette smoke is especially harmful to individuals with A1AD. In addition to increasing the inflammation|inflammatory reaction in the airways, cigarette smoke directly inactivates alpha-1 antitrypsin by oxidation|oxidizing essential methionine residues to sulfoxide forms, decreasing the enzyme activity by a factor of 2,000. With A1AT deficiency, the pathogenesis of the lung disease is different from that of the liver disease, which is caused by the accumulation of abnormal A1AT proteins in the liver, resulting in liver damage. As such, lung disease and liver disease of A1AT deficiency appear unrelated, and the presence of one does not appear to predict the presence of the other. Between 10 and 15% of people with the PiZZ genotype will develop liver fibrosis or cirrhosis|liver cirrhosis, because the A1AT is not secreted properly and therefore accumulates in the liver. The mutant Z form of A1AT protein undergoes inefficient protein folding (a physical process where a protein chain achieves its final conformation). 85 percent of the mutant Z form are unable to be secreted and remain in the hepatocyte.  Nearly all liver disease caused by A1AT is due to the PiZZ genotype, although other genotypes involving different combinations of mutated alleles (compound heterozygotes) may also result in liver disease. A liver biopsy in such cases will reveal Periodic acid-Shiff|PAS-positive, diastase-resistant inclusions within hepatocytes. Unlike glycogen and other mucins which are diastase sensitive (i.e., diastase treatment disables PAS staining), A1AT deficient hepatocytes will stain with PAS even after diastase treatment - a state thus referred to as "diastase resistant". ...
