     | branch = United States Army|Army<!-- EDITORS NOTE: Please do not add the Army flag adopted by the U.S. government in 1956 (36 years after the General Headquarters, American Expeditionary Forces was disestablished) as it would be historically inaccurate. Thank you. --> | role = Command and control | size = 2,057,675 men (1918) | garrison = Chaumont, Haute-Marne|Chaumont, France | garrison_label = Headquarters|General Headquarters | nickname = A. E. F. | battles = World War I<br /> * Western Front (World War I)|Western Front ** Battle of Cambrai (1917)|Battle of Cambrai ** German spring offensive ** Hundred Days Offensive * Italian Front (World War I)|Italian Front ** Battle of Vittorio Veneto | commander1 = General of the Armies John J. Pershing | commander1_label = Commander-in-chief|Commander in Chief | commander2 = Major General Francis Joseph Kernan|Francis J. Kernan | commander2_label = Commander of the Services of Supply, American Expeditionary Forces|Services of Supply | commander3 = Major General Mason Patrick|Mason M. Patrick | commander3_label = Chief of the United States Air Service|Army Air Service }} The "American Expeditionary Forces" ("A. E. F.") was a formation of the United States Armed Forces on the Western Front (World War I)|Western Front during World War I. The A. E. F. was established on July 5, 1917, in France under the command of then-Major General John J. Pershing. It fought alongside French Army, British Army, Canadian Army, New Zealand Army and Australian Army units against the Imperial German Army. A small number of A. E. F. troops also fought alongside Italian Army units in 1918 against the Austro-Hungarian Army. The A. E. F. helped the French Army on the Western Front during the Third Battle of the Aisne|Aisne Offensive (at the Battle of Château-Thierry (1918)|Battle of Château-Thierry and Battle of Belleau Wood) in the summer of 1918, and fought its major actions in the Battle of Saint-Mihiel and the Meuse-Argonne Offensive in the latter part of 1918. ==Formation==  File:Famous generals of the great war who led the United States and her allies to a glorious victory (1919) (14596448378).jpg|thumb|upright|right|American Expeditionary Forces Commander in Chief, General John J. Pershing in 1917. President of the United States|President Woodrow Wilson initially planned to give command of the A. E. F. to Gen. Frederick Funston, but after Funston's sudden death, Wilson appointed Major General John J. Pershing in May 1917, and Pershing remained in command for the rest of the war. Pershing insisted that American soldiers be well-trained before going to Europe. As a result, few troops arrived before January 1918. In addition, Pershing insisted that the American force would not be used merely to fill gaps in the French and British armies, and he resisted European efforts to have U.S. troops deployed as individual replacements in depleted Allies of World War I|Allied units.  This approach was not always well received by the western Allied leaders who distrusted the potential of an army lacking experience in large-scale warfare.Coffman, "The War to End All Wars" (1998) In addition, the British government tried to use its spare shipping as leverage to bring US soldiers under British operational control. File:Port of Embarkation Hoboken (1917-1918).png|thumb|right|200px|Map, Port of Embarkation Hoboken (1917–18). By June 1917, only 14,000 American soldiers had arrived in France, and the A. E. F. had only a minor participation at the front up to late October 1917, but by May 1918 over one million American troops were stationed in France, though only half of them made it to the front lines.Pershing, "My Experiences in the World War" (1931)  Since the transport ships needed to bring American troops to Europe were scarce at the beginning, the U.S. Army pressed into service passenger liners, seized German ships, and borrowed Allied ships to transport American soldiers from the Hoboken Port of Embarkation with facilities in New York City and New Jersey, and  the Hampton Roads Port of Embarkation#World War I|Newport News Port of Embarkation in Virginia. The mobilization effort taxed the American military to the limit and required new organizational strategies and command structures to transport great numbers of troops and supplies quickly and efficiently. The French harbors of Bordeaux, La Pallice, Saint Nazaire, and Brest, France|Brest became the entry points into the French railway system that brought the American troops and their supplies to the Western Front. American engineers in France also built 82 new ship berths, nearly  of additional standard-gauge tracks, and over  of telephone and telegraph lines. File:The US Army in Britain, 1917-1918 Q30005.jpg|thumb|right|Column of American troops passing Buckingham Palace, London, 1917. The first American troops, who were often called "Doughboys," landed in Europe in June 1917. However the A. E. F. did not participate at the front until October 23, 1917, when the 1st Infantry Division (United States)|1st Division fired the first American shell of the war toward German lines, although they participated only on a small scale. A group of regular soldiers and the first American division to arrive in France, entered the trenches near Nancy, France, in Lorraine. File:America's First Convoy 1917.png|thumb|left|With America's first convoy. The troop ships are "Henderson", "Antilles", "Momus", and "Lenape". I Corps was officially activated in France, under the A. E. F., from 15 January 1918. It include the 1st, 2nd, 26th, 32nd, 41st and 42nd Divisions. (4th Brigade, US Marine Corps, was included as part of 2nd Division.) II Corps was activated on 24 February,Yockelson, p. 34. by which time troop numbers justified it. Initially II Corps consisted of the 27th, 30th, 33rd, 78th and 80th Divisions. In June 1918, many component infantry units from II Corps – commanded by Maj.-Gen. George Windle Read|George W. Read – were attached to veteran British Army or Australian Army units. This served two purposes: familiarizing the Americans with actual battlefield conditions in France, and temporarily reinforcing the British Empire units that were often severely-depleted in numbers, after more than three years of fighting. In fact, the first major operation in World War I to involve US troops concerned individual infantry platoons of the 33rd Division, which were attached to battalions of the Australian Corps for the Battle of Hamel on the 4th of July. Their involvement was voluntary and occurred despite last-minute orders from A. E. F. headquarters, that its troops should not take part in offensive operations led by non-US generals. Thus Hamel was historically significant as the first major offensive operation during the war to involve US infantry and the first occasion on which US units had fought alongside British Empire forces. File:18th Infantry MG Battalion in St. Baussant HD-SN-99-02303.JPG|thumb|right|Men of the 18th Machine Gun Battalion passing through St. Baussant in advance upon St. Mihiel, September 13, 1918. The A. E. F. used French and British equipment. Particularly appreciated were the French canon de 75 modèle 1897, the canon de 155 C modèle 1917 Schneider, and the canon de 155mm GPF. American aviation units received the SPAD XIII and Nieuport 28 fighters, and the U.S. Army tank corps used French Renault FT light tanks. Pershing established facilities in France to train new arrivals with their new weapons.Wilson, "Treat 'Em Rough: The Birth of American Armor, 1917–1920" (1989)  By the end of 1917, four divisions were deployed in a large training area near Verdun: the 1st Division, a regular army formation; the 26th Infantry Division (United States)|26th Division, a National Guard (United States)|National Guard division; the 2nd Infantry Division (United States)|2nd Division, a combination of regular troops and United States Marine Corps|U.S. Marines; and the 42nd Infantry Division (United States)|42nd "Rainbow" Division, a National Guard division made up of soldiers from nearly every state in the United States. The fifth division, the 41st Infantry Division (United States)|41st Division, was converted into a depot division near Tours.   File:Hubble identity card.jpg|left|thumb|A. E. F. officer's identity card belonging to Edwin Hubble, 1918 Logistic operations were under the direction of Chicago banker Charles G. Dawes, with the rank first of colonel and then brigadier general. Dawes reported directly to Gen. Pershing.  Dawes recommended in May 1918 that the allies set up a joint logistics planning board, which was approved by the Allies in the form of the Military Board of Allied Supply (MBAS), which coordinated logistics and transportation on the Western and Italian fronts.Edward A. Goedeken, "Charles Dawes and the Military Board of Allied Supply." "Journal of Military History" 50.1 (1986): 1-6. Supporting the two million soldiers across the Atlantic Ocean was a massive logistical enterprise. In order to be successful, the Americans needed to create a coherent support structure with very little institutional knowledge. The A. E. F. developed support network appropriate for the huge size of the American force. It rested upon the Services of Supply, American Expeditionary Forces|Services of Supply in the rear areas, with ports, railroads, depots, schools, maintenance facilities, bakeries, clothing repair shops (termed salvage), replacement depots, ice plants, and a wide variety of other activities. The Services of Supply initiated support techniques that would last well into the Cold War including forward maintenance, field cooking, graves registration (mortuary affairs), host nation support, motor transport, and morale services. The work of the logisticians enabled the success of the A. E. F. and contributed to the emergence of the American Army as a modern fighting force.Leo P. Hirrel, “” Ft. Leavenworth: Combat Studies Institute, 2017.  Available at no cost.  File:(African American) Officers of 366th Infantry Back on Aquitania. These officers, all of whom ha . . . - NARA - 533490.tif|thumb|right|Officers of the 366th Infantry Regiment (United States)|366th Infantry, 1919 African Americans were drafted on the same basis as White American|whites and made up 13 percent of the draftees. By the end of the war, over 350,000 African-Americans had served in A. E. F. units on the Western Front.; "U.S. Army"; Gerry J. Gilmore; February 2, 2007 However, they were assigned to segregated units commanded by white officers. One fifth of the black soldiers sent to France saw combat, compared to two-thirds of the whites. They were three percent of A. E. F. combat forces, and under two percent of battlefield fatalities.Jennifer D. Keene, "Americans as Warriors: 'Doughboys' in Battle during the First World War", "OAH Magazine of History", Vol. 17, No. 1, World War I (Oct., 2002), p. 17. "The mass of the colored drafted men cannot be used for combatant troops", said a General Staff report in 1918, and it recommended that "these colored drafted men be organized in reserve labor battalions." They handled unskilled labor tasks as Stevedore operations, American Expeditionary Forces|stevedores in the Atlantic ports and common laborers at the camps and in the Services of the Rear in France.Kennedy (1982) 162. The French, whose front-line troops were resisting combat duties to the point of mutiny, requested and received control of several regiments of black combat troops.Barbeau and Henri (1974); . Kennedy reports "Units of the black 92nd Infantry Division (United States)|92nd Division particularly suffered from poor preparation and the breakdown in command control. As the only black combat division, the 92nd Division entered the line with unique liabilities. It had been deliberately dispersed throughout several camps during its stateside training; some of its artillery units were summoned to France before they had completed their courses of instruction, and were never fully-equipped until after the Armistice; nearly all its senior white officers scorned the men under their command and repeatedly asked to be transferred. The black enlisted men were frequently diverted from their already attenuated training opportunities in France in the summer of 1918 and put to work as stevedores and common laborers."Kennedy (1982) p. 199. The 369th Infantry Regiment (United States)|369th, 370th Infantry Regiment (United States)|370th, 371st Infantry Regiment (United States)|371st, and 372nd Infantry Regiment (United States)|372nd Infantry Regiments (nominally the 93rd Infantry Division (United States)|93d Division, but never consolidated as such) served with distinction under French command with French colonial units in front-line combat. The French did not harbor the same levels of disdain based on skin color and for many Americans of African descent it was a liberating and refreshing experience. These African-American soldiers wore American uniforms, some dating from the time of the Union Army, with Adrian helmet|French helmets and were armed with French Berthier rifle#World War I and the Fusil Mle 1907/15|Model 1907/15 Berthier rifle  manufactured by Remington Arms, rather than the M1903 Springfield or M1917 Enfield rifles issued to most American soldiers.Canfield, Bruce N. "American Rifleman" (April 2009) p. 40  One of the most distinguished units was the 369th Infantry Regiment, known as the Harlem Hellfighters. The 369th was on the front lines for six months, longer than any other African-American regiment in the war. One hundred seventy-one members of the 369th were awarded the Legion of Merit.{{Cite web |url=http://www.explorepahistory.com/~expa/c ...
