      File:Statue of Liberty 7.jpg|thumb|The Statue of Liberty contains several symbols associated with a combination of features unique to the United States: the date of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, a broken shackle and chain representing the abolition of slavery, and a torch symbolizing American Enlightenment|enlightenment. "American exceptionalism" is the belief that the United States is either distinctive, unique, or exemplary compared to other nations. Proponents of it argue that the Culture of the United States|values, Politics of the United States|political system, and History of the United States|historical development of the U.S. are unique in human history, often with the implication that it is both destined and entitled to play a distinct and positive role on the world stage. It originates in the observations and writings of French political scientist and historian Alexis de Tocqueville, most notably in his comparison of the United States with Great Britain and his native France. Tocqueville was the first writer to describe the country as "exceptional" following his travels there in 1831.de Tocqueville, Alexis.  (1840), part 2, p. 36: "The position of the Americans is therefore quite exceptional, and it may be believed that no other democratic people will ever be placed in a similar one." The earliest documented use of the specific term "American exceptionalism" is by American communists in intra-communist disputes in the late 1920s. Political science|Political scientist Seymour Martin Lipset argues that the United States is exceptional in that it started from a revolutionary event. He therefore traces the origins of American exceptionalism to the American Revolution, from which the U.S. emerged as "the first new nation" with a distinct ideology.Seymour Martin Lipset, "The first new nation" (1963). This ideology, which Lipset called Americanism (ideology)|Americanism, but is often also referred to as American exceptionalism, is based on liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, republicanism, democracy, and Laissez-faire|laissez-faire economics; these principles are sometimes collectively referred to as "American exceptionalism".Lipset, "American Exceptionalism", pp. 1, 17–19, 165–74, 197 As a term in social science, American exceptionalism refers to the United States' status as a global outlier. Critics of the concept claim that the idea of American exceptionalism suggests that the US is better than other countries, has a superior culture, or has a unique mission to transform the planet and its inhabitants. Walt, Stephen M.   "Foreign Policy (October 21, 2011)" == Terminology == The concept of the United States as an exceptional Society of the United States|society has a long history, sometimes traced back to French writer Alexis de Tocqueville or to the ideas espoused by the Founding Fathers of the United States during the American Revolution.Bernard Bailyn, "The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution". p. 92 For example, in August 1861 "The Times" of London alluded to "the 'exceptionalism,' if one may use the word, on which the Americans rather pride themselves" in a discussion of the American Civil War. However, the specific term "American exceptionalism" seems to have originated with American communists in the late 1920s. The earliest documented usage cited by the Oxford English Dictionary is from the "Daily Worker", 29 January 1929: "This American 'exceptionalism' applies to the whole tactical line of the Communist International as applied to America." In turn, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin (who was likely aware of this earlier use) condemned the "heresy of American exceptionalism" in a tense discussion with Jay Lovestone of the Communist Party USA, after Lovestone echoed the arguments of other American communists that the U.S. is independent of the Historical materialism|Marxist laws of history "thanks to its natural resources, industrial capacity, and absence of rigid class distinctions." The term later moved into general use by intellectuals. "American exceptionalism" was rarely used after the 1930s until U.S. newspapers popularized it in the 1980s to describe America's cultural and political uniqueness. In 1989, the Scottish political scientist Richard Rose noted that most American historians endorse exceptionalism, and he suggested their reasoning to be as follows: <blockquote>America marches to a different drummer. Its uniqueness is explained by any or all of a variety of reasons: history, size, geography, political institutions, and culture. Explanations of the growth of government in Europe are not expected to fit American experience, and vice versa.</blockquote> However, postnationalist scholars reject American exceptionalism and argue the U.S. did not break from European history and accordingly has retained class-based and racial inequality in the United States|race-based differences as well as imperialism and willingness to wage war.David W. Noble, "Death of a Nation: American Culture and the end of exceptionalism", pp. xxiii ff. In recent years, scholars from numerous disciplines, as well as politicians and commentators in the traditional media, have debated the meaning and usefulness of the concept. Roberts and DiCuirci ask:  Some historians support the concept of American exceptionalism but avoid the terminology to avoid getting entangled in rhetorical debates. Bernard Bailyn, a leading colonial specialist at Harvard, was a believer in the distinctiveness of American civilization. Although he rarely, if ever, used the phrase "American exceptionalism," he insisted upon the "distinctive characteristics of British North American life." He argued that the process of social and cultural transmission result in peculiarly-American patterns of education in the broadest sense of the word, and he believed in the unique character of the American Revolution.Michael Kammen and Stanley N. Katz. "Bernard Bailyn, Historian, and Teacher: An Appreciation." by James A. Henretta, Michael Kämmen, and Stanley N. Katz, eds. "The Transformation of Early American History: Society, Authority, and Ideology" (1991) p. 10. The term became an issue of contention between the presidential candidates Barack Obama and John McCain in the 2008 United States presidential election|2008 presidential campaign, with McCain attacking Obama for allegedly disbelieving the concept. == History of concept ==  The first reference to the concept by name, and possibly its origin, was by the French writer Alexis de Tocqueville in his 1835/1840 work "Democracy in America":"Foreword: on American Exceptionalism; Symposium on Treaties, Enforcement, and U.S. Sovereignty", "Stanford Law Review", May 1, 2003, p. 1479 Kammen says that many foreign visitors commented on American exceptionalism including Karl Marx, Francis Lieber, Hermann Eduard von Holst, James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce|James Bryce, H. G. Wells, G. K. Chesterton, and Hilaire Belloc and that they did so in complimentary terms.Kammen p. 7 The theme became common, especially in textbooks. From the 1840s to the late 19th century, the McGuffey Readers sold 120 million copies and were studied by most American students. Skrabec (2009) argues the "Readers" "hailed American exceptionalism, manifest destiny, and America as God's country.... Furthermore, McGuffey saw America as having a future mission to bring liberty and democracy to the world."File:Annexation Here to Stay.jpg|thumb|Newspaper reporting the Newlands Resolution|annexation of the Republic of Hawaii in 1898. American exceptionalism has fueled American expansion through the ideology of manifest destiny.  In June 1927 Jay Lovestone, a leader of the Communist Party USA and who would soon be named as general secretary, described America's economic and social uniqueness. He noted the increasing strength of American capitalism and the country's "tremendous reserve power" and said that they both prevented a communist revolution.Fried, Albert.  Columbia University Press, 1997.  In mid-1929, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, disbelieving that America was so resistant to revolution, denounced Lovestone's ideas as "the heresy of American exceptionalism,"Pease, Donald E. Editors: Bruce Burgett and Glenn Hendler. , in "Keywords for American Cultural Studies". NYU Press, 2007.  which was likely a reference to an article published in the "Daily Worker" earlier that year. The Great Depression in the United States appeared to underscore Stalin's argument that American capitalism falls under the general laws of Marxism.{{cite web|last=McCoy|first=Terrence|title=How Joseph Stalin Invented 'American Exceptionalism'|url=https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/03/how-joseph-stalin-invented-american-exceptionalism/254534/|work=The Atlantic, March 15, 2012|access-date= ...
