   File:AMORC_Symbol.png|thumb|right | Official Worldwide Emblem of the Rosicrucian Order File:AMORC_Rose_Cross.png|thumb|right|Cross of the Rosicrucian Order File:Mbstacy cross.jpg|thumb|right|A Rosicrucian Master's Cross, from the AMORC Rosicrucian Library in San Jose  The "Ancient and Mystical Order Rosæ Crucis" (AMORC), also known as the ""Rosicrucian Order"", is the largest Rosicrucianism|Rosicrucian organization in the world. It has various lodges, chapters and other affiliated bodies throughout the globe, operating in 19 different languages. It operates as a fraternal order in the mysticism|mystical tradition, and supports secular research and learning in the arts and humanities. AMORC claims an association with a "perennial philosophy", often referred to as "The Primordial Tradition". The Order further states that it is heir and custodian of the "Rose-Croix" of the past, thereby making it the oldest existing Traditional Fraternity and a modern-day manifestation of the 'Rosicrucian Fraternity' of old, which is believed by some to have originated in the traditions of the Ancient Egyptian Greco-Roman mysteries|Mystery schools. The ancient Mysteries are said to have been preserved through the millennia by closed secret societies until the early years of 17th Century Europe. At that point, according to AMORC internal mythology, the time was right for the existence of this body of secret knowledge to become open, i.e. revealed, to the world, in the form of the Rosicrucian Manifestos|Rosicrucian manifestos. Famous seventeenth century Rosicrucian Michael Maier described the origins of Rosicrucianism as "Egyptian, Brahmanic, derived from the Mysteries of Eleusis and Samothrace, the Magi of Persia, the Pythagoreans, and the Arabs." Several of his other works also allude to the mysterious origins of the Rosicrucianism|Rosicrucians. Today, AMORC is regarded as representing an "open cycle" of the ancient Rosicrucian tradition, its existence being a "reactivation" of Rosicrucian teaching in the United States, with previous Rosicrucian colonies in the United States having become dormant. AMORC presents itself as a worldwide philosophical and humanistic, non-sectarian and apolitical fraternal order devoted to "the study of the elusive mysteries of life and the universe." It is also open to both men and women of legal adult age (18 years old in most countries) regardless of their various religious persuasions. == Name == The name AMORC is an abbreviation of the Latin title "Antiquus Mysticusque Ordo Rosæ Crucis" ("Ancient and Mystic Order of the Rosy Cross" – "Antiquus Arcanus Ordo Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis"). Harvey Spencer Lewis, author and mystic who re-activated AMORC in the United States of America, wrote that "from the very start, and with the issuance of the first public manifesto, the correct name of the international Rosicrucian organization was used, namely, the "Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis". This is a slightly abbreviated form of the original Latin name, "Antiquus Arcanus Ordo Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis", and the initials AMORC were immediately used, as well as the true and original symbol of the Rosicrucian Order – the golden cross with but "one red rose" in the center".Lewis, H. Spencer "Rosicrucian Questions and Answers with Complete History of the Rosicrucian Order", pp. 180–181, Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC, 1929,  AMORC claims to hold legal rights to the above-mentioned titles including the title "Rosicrucian Order”.H. Spencer Lewis "Rosicrucian Manual", p. 7, Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC, 1982 ; 1st ed. 1918 ==Teachings== AMORC's teachings cover what may be termed the "Sacred Sciences" and include ideas based on the major philosophers, particularly Pythagoras, Thales, Solon, Heraclitus, and Democritus. The teachings are divided into "Degrees" which are further grouped into broad categories under titles such as " Postulant", "Neophyte," and "Initiate" sections. These degrees cover various fields related to physical, mental, psychic, and spiritual existence such as physics, metaphysics, biology, psychology, parapsychology, comparative religion, traditional healing techniques, health, intuition (knowledge)|intuition, extrasensory perception, material and spiritual alchemy, meditation, sacred architecture, symbolism, and that mystical state of consciousness relating to the experience of unity with the Divine.According to AMORC's publication "Mastery of Life" ==Organization and structure== AMORC is a worldwide organization, established in the United States as a nonprofit 501(c)(3) public benefit corporation, with the specific and primary purpose of advancing the knowledge of its history, principles, and teachings for charitable, educational, and scientific purposes. It is financed mainly through fees paid by its members. Income is used by the organization to pay expenses, develop new programs, expand services, and carry out educational work. AMORC is governed by the Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC which is composed of the Imperator, and the Board of Directors which is further composed of the Grand Masters of the Grand Lodges and related executive officers, and meets annually, often in Lachute, Quebec, Canada (however, in August 2009 the Supreme Board met in Toulouse, France, in honor of the 100th Anniversary of H. Spencer Lewis's initiation there) and more recently in Rome, Italy. It is responsible for the worldwide coordination of AMORC, the establishment of new administrations, and the appointment of jurisdictions to Grand Lodges, usually based on language.H. Spencer Lewis "Rosicrucian Manual", p. 18-19, Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC, 1982 ; 1st ed. 1918 Each AMORC Grand Lodge has its own headquarters and facilities. The headquarters of the English Grand Lodge for the Americas owns the Rosicrucian Park in San Jose, California, founded in 1927, which includes the Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum, the fifth planetarium built in the USA (and the first to have a US-built star projector, built by Dr. Harvey Spencer Lewis), the Rosicrucian Peace Garden, Rosicrucian Research Library, Grand Temple, Administration Building, Fountain Plaza and Gardens, the Alchemy Garden and the walking Labyrinth.Rachael Myrow, , "Kqed.org", 13 July 2017 ==History== File:Francis Bacon.jpg|upright|thumb|Francis Bacon, claimed by AMORC to have been an Imperator of the Rosicrucianism|Rosicrucian Order According to AMORC's internal history, in 1909 Harvey Spencer Lewis visited France in search of Rosicrucians, was initiated in Toulouse, France, and given the mandate to establish an order in North America. After further qualification and preparation, the first official Manifesto was issued in the United States in 1915, announcing the establishment of Rosicrucian activity in America. May Banks-Stacy, the co-founder of AMORC, was said to be one of the last successors to the original colony of Rosicrucians who settled in America during the late 17th century, and an initiate of the Rosicrucians of the East.Christian Rebisse, pp.161–163. Lewis became a "secret partner" of Big Business in America.H. Spencer Lewis "Rosicrucian Principles for Home and Business", p. 15, Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC, 1953 ASIN: B000O3PY9K; 1st ed. 1929 According to railroad magnate Arthur Stilwell, no other man has exerted a greater influence as a secret partner in American free enterprise than Lewis. Walt Disney was once a member of AMORC as was "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry and many other well-known individuals who prefer to remain anonymous.Erik Davis "The Visionary State", p. 112, Chronicle Books, 2006  AMORC headquarters were located in New York City, San Francisco, and Tampa, Florida, before moving to San Jose, California, in 1927. Harvey Spencer Lewis died in 1939 and, in accordance with wishes stipulated in his will, was succeeded in the Office of Imperator by his son Ralph Maxwell Lewis, who had previously served as Supreme Secretary. Upon Lewis' death in 1987, Gary L. Stewart, who previously served as Grand Master of the English-Speaking jurisdiction and then Vice President of AMORC's Board of Directors, was appointed by the Board, which forms the Supreme Grand Lodge, to the Office of Imperator. In 1990, Christian Bernard, who had been the Grand Master of France, and then succeeded Stewart to the position of Vice President of the Board, was elected by the Board to the Office of Imperator. The Rosicrucian Order, AMORC|website=The Rosicrucian Order, AMORC|access-date=2017-05-11|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20181004062449/https://www.rosicrucian.org/christian-bernard-imperator|archive-date=2018-10-04|url-status=dead}} During World War II, AMORC underwent a dramatic period of growth. After the war ended AMORC was able to lend support to its European sister organizations. Eventually many of those came under the administration of AMORC's leadership in San Jose. 2009, the centennial year of H. Spencer Lewis's initiation in Toulouse, saw growth in membership in the English Grand Lodge for the Americas and very active participation in on-line activities including Facebook, Twitter, online discussion groups, a social networking site, podcasts and Rosicrucian TV on YouTube. Rosicrucian Park in San Jose received many improvements as well, including the completion of accessibility upgrades to the museum, planetarium and grounds, and the installation of sustainable native plant gardens. AMORC uses "traditional" history, consisting of tales and legends represented as having been passed down for centuries by word of mouth, as well as the conventional "chronological" history, which consists of verifiable fact. According to its traditional history, AMORC traces its origin to "Greco-Roman mysteries|Mystery Schools" established in Egypt during the joint reign of Pharaoh Thutmose III and Hatshepsut, about 1500 BCE. They united the priesthoods of Egypt into a single order under the leadership of Hatshepsut's Vizier, Hapuseneb.James H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt, Vol 2, The Eighteenth Dynasty (1906; repr., New York: Russell and Russell, 1962), 160–162 Each Temple had its associated "Per Ankh" (House of Life) where the Mysteries were handed down.Garth Fowden, The Egyptian Hermes (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), 57. In uniting the priesthoods, the "Per Ankhu" were also united. Those schools were formed to probe into "the mysteries of life" – in other words, natural phenomena, and initiatic spirituality.See Jeremy Naydler, Shamanic Wisdom of the Pyramid Texts (Rochester VT: Inner Traditions, 2005). AMORC also claims that among their most esteemed pupils were Pharaoh Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV) and his wife Nefertiti.Christian Bernard "Rosicrucian Reflection", p. 7, Supreme Grand Lodge of AMORC, 2012  Over centuries, the Mystery Schools spread into Greece and thence into Rome. During the Middle Ages, they were allegedly concealed under various names. AMORC claims that Rosicrucianism is mentioned as far back as 1115 Common Era|CE in a book of the collection of Brother Omnis Moriar in Germany. However, no other record of such a brother or book has appeared. The alleged name probably derives from the opening words of Horace in Ode 3.30, in which he writes: "Non Omnis Moriar" ("I shall not completely die"). File:Boehme Portrait 1730.jpeg|upright|thumb|left|Jakob Böhme, claimed by AMORC to have been a Rosicrucian Rosicrucianism rose to considerable prominence in Europe during the 17th century following the publication and wide circulation of a small pamphlet, the "Fama Fraternitatis". AMORC scholars have suggested that Rosicrucians first went to America in the area of present-day Carmel-by-the-Sea, California in the Vizcaíno Expedition of 1602–1603. The next Rosicrucian expedition to America is said to have been by the chartered vessel "Sarah Maria" during the early months of 1694, under the leadership of Grand Master Johannes Kelpius, and a colony was established in what is now Fairmount Park, Philadelphia.Julius F. Sachse ...
