   | creator = Norman Lear | occupation =  | spouse = Edith Bunker|Edith Baines (1925–1980; her death) | children = Gloria Stivic|Gloria Bunker Stivic | family =  | relatives =  }} "Archibald" ""Archie"" "Bunker" is a fictional character from the 1970s American television sitcom "All in the Family" and its spin-off "Archie Bunker's Place", played by Carroll O'Connor. Bunker, a main character of the series, is a World War II veteran, blue-collar worker, and family man. "All in the Family" premiered on January 12, 1971, where he was depicted as the head of the Bunker family. In 1979, the show was retooled and renamed "Archie Bunker's Place"; it finally went off the air in 1983. Bunker lived at the fictional address of 704 Hauser Street in the borough of Queens, in New York City. "All in the Family" got many of its laughs by playing on Archie's bigotry, although the dynamic tension between Archie and his Modern liberalism in the United States|liberal son-in-law, Mike, provided an ongoing political and social sounding board for a variety of topics. Archie appears in all but seven episodes of the series. Three fifth-season episodes were missed because of a contract dispute between O'Connor and series creator Norman Lear. Archie was modeled after Norman Lear's father Herman Lear and on Alf Garnett from the BBC1 sitcom "Till Death Us Do Part", on which "All in the Family" was based. In 1999, "TV Guide" ranked Archie Bunker number5 on its 50 Greatest TV Characters of All Time list. In 2005, Archie Bunker was listed as number1 on Bravo (US TV channel)|Bravo's 100 Greatest TV Characters, defeating runners-up such as Ralph Kramden, Lucy Ricardo, Fonzie, and Homer Simpson. Archie's chair is in the permanent collection of the National Museum of American History. ==Character traits== Archie has a gruff, overbearing demeanor, largely defined by his bigotry toward a diverse group of individuals: African American|blacks, Hispanics, Communism|"Commies", gays, hippies, Jews, Asians, Catholics, "Women's liberation movement|women's libbers", and Polish–Americans are frequent targets of his barbs. He refers to his son-in-law Michael as "dumb Polack" and even describes blacks as "colored;" in earlier episodes, it is noted that he previously called blacks "coons" prior to Gloria's marriage to Michael. As the show progresses, it becomes evident that Archie's prejudice is not motivated by malice, but is rather a combination of the era and environment in which he was raised and a generalized misanthropy. Archie himself is depicted as a striving, loving father, and basically decent man; nevertheless, he is ill-tempered and frequently tells his long-suffering wife Edith Bunker|Edith to "stifle yourself" and "dummy up". Series creator Norman Lear admitted this is how his father treated Lear's mother. Archie "turned the angry white male into a cultural icon", according to CBS News. . CBS News. After the end of the second season taping, O'Connor said, paraphrasing James Baldwin, "The American white man is trapped by his own cultural history. He doesn't know what to do about it." O'Connor goes on to say: <blockquote>Archie's dilemma is coping with a world that is changing in front of him. He doesn't know what to do, except to lose his temper, mouth his poisons, look elsewhere to fix the blame for his own discomfort. He isn't a totally evil man. He's shrewd. But he won't get to the root of his problem, because the root of his problem is himself, and he doesn't know it. That is the dilemma of Archie Bunker.</blockquote> As the series progressed, Archie mellowed somewhat, albeit often out of necessity. In one episode, he expresses revulsion for a Ku Klux Klan-like organization which he accidentally joins."Archie and the KKK", Parts I and II On another occasion, when asked to speak at the funeral of his friend Stretch Cunningham (James Cromwell), Archie—surprised to learn that his friend was Jewish—overcomes his initial discomfort and delivers a moving eulogy, wearing a yarmulke, and closing with a heartfelt "shalom". In 1978, the character became the guardian of Edith's stepcousin Floyd's nine-year-old daughter, Stephanie (Danielle Brisebois) and came to accept her Jewish faith, even buying her a Star of David pendant.Episode 197 Archie was also known for his frequent malapropisms and spoonerisms. For example, he refers to Edith's gynecologist as a "groinacologist" and to Catholic priests who go around sprinkling "incest" (incense) on their congregation, whereas he referred to incest itself as "committing 'insects' in the family". Archie repeatedly called President Richard M. Nixon "Richard E. Nixon". By the show's second season, these had become dubbed "Bunkerisms", "Archie Bunkerisms", or simply "Archie-isms". Define Archie-bunker at Dictionary.com |access-date=October 5, 2012 |archive-date=January 16, 2014 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140116113559/http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/archie+bunkerism |url-status=live }} O'Connor was Irish Catholic, and Norman Lear modeled the character on his Jewish father, but Bunker's own ethnicity is never explicitly stated, other than identifying him as a White Anglo-Saxon Protestant|WASP; over the course of the series, he mocks or belittles not just most minorities (including blacks, Hispanics, Latinos, and Asians), but also most white ethnic groups as well. Archie, a Christian belonging to the Episcopal denomination, often misquotes the Bible. He takes pride in being religious, although he rarely attends church services and constantly mispronounces the name of his minister, Reverend Felcher, as "Reverend Fletcher". (When Edith inevitably corrects him, he dismisses the error with "Whatever".) He is a compulsive gambler, who, in earlier years, frequently lost his entire weekly paycheck in poker games, as related by Edith in the Season4 episode "Archie the Gambler"; he quit only when Edith threatened to leave him, taking then three-year old Gloria with her. ==Character biography== When first introduced on "All in the Family" in 1971, Archie is the head of a family consisting of his wife Edith Bunker|Edith (Jean Stapleton), his adult daughter Gloria Stivic|Gloria (Sally Struthers), and his liberal son-in-law, college student Michael Stivic|Michael "Mike" Stivic (Rob Reiner), with whom Archie disagrees on virtually everything; Archie frequently characterizes Mike as a "dumb Polack" and usually addresses him as "Meathead" because, in Archie's words, he is "dead from the neck up". During the show's first five seasons, Mike and Gloria live with Archie and Edith so Mike can put himself through college. Upon Mike's graduation, he and Gloria move into their own home next door, allowing Archie and Mike to interact nearly as much as they had when they were living in the same house. Archie was born in Queens U-M LSA History |url=https://lsa.umich.edu/history/reverbeffect/episode7.html |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20200814094752/https://lsa.umich.edu/history/reverbeffect/episode7.html |archive-date=2020-08-14 |website=lsa.umich.edu}} on May 18, 1924,In the episode "Archie & the Miracle", Archie explains to Mike that he believes he has the winning church raffle ticket #18 because "the Lord saved me on the 18th; I was born on the 18th of the month". In episode 106, List of All in the Family episodes#Season 5: 1974–1975|"Archie and the Quiz", there is a direct reference to the fact that Archie was born in 1924. to parents David and Sarah.Stated in season one, episode one, "Meet the Bunkers" He is a Taurus (astrology)|Taurus.Last original airing of Archie Bunker's Place  Information on his siblings is inconsistent, because three of them are mentioned, and Archie is seen talking on the phone to his younger brother Fred in "Cousin Oscar" (as well as Fred's daughter Debbie Marie), but during season 6episode "Archie Finds a Friend", he states that he is an only child. Two later episodes (one during season8 and another during season 9) feature Fred (played by Richard McKenzie (actor)|Richard McKenzie) and it is now suggested that Fred is Archie's only sibling. Another of Fred's daughters, Linda, visited Archie during the third season (she briefly dated the Bunkers' neighbor Lionel in "Lionel Steps Out"). Archie's father David is said to be an only child while his mother Sarah has one brother named Roy Longstreet whom Archie liked more than his own parents. Two of Archie's cousins are depicted: Oscar, who dies off-camera in the Bunker house during a visit, and cousin Bertha (played by Peggy Rea, who appears in the same episode), apparently a somewhat distant cousin, because Archie does not recognize her.In the Season 2 opener, Archie asks "Who the hell are you?" to his cousin Bertha. Archie celebrates his 50th birthday in a 1974 episode and the character is last seen on the final episode of "Archie Bunker's Place", titled "I'm Torn Here", on April 4, 1983. In season 5, during a three-episode stretch where Archie's whereabouts are unknown, it is revealed that he attended Flushing, Queens|Flushing High School and varsity letter|lettered in baseball. He tried out for the New York Giants but could not turn professional because he was drafted to serve in World War II. Likewise he never took advantage of the G.I. Bill in order to finish his high school education (although years later he took a night school course to get a high school diploma). After World War II ended, he got a job on a New York City loading dock through his uncle's influence; by 1974 he had risen up to dock foreman. To supplement his income he also works as a part-time taxi driver at night. While locked in the storeroom of Archie's bar (Archie's Place) with Mike in the season8 "All in the Family" episode List of All in the Family episodes#Season 8: 1977–1978|"Two's a Crowd", a drunk Archie confides that as a child, his family was desperately poor, and he was teased in school because he wore a shoe on one foot and a boot on the other, so kids nicknamed him "Shoe-booty". In the same episode, Mike learns that Archie was mentally and physically abused by his father, who was also the source of his bigoted views. Yet, Archie then goes on to vehemently defend his father, who he claims loved him and taught him "to do good". It is revealed that Archie's father was a brakeman for the Long Island Rail Road, when Archie receives his father's pocket watch from his formerly long-estranged brother, Alfred ("Fred"), who later appeared in two "All in the Family" episodes, "List of All in the Family episodes|Archie's Brother" and "List of All in the Family episodes|The Return of Archie's Brother", and the "Archie Bunker's Place" episode "Father Christmas". When Fred visits Archie in the "Archie's Brother" episode, it is revealed that they had not seen each other in the 29 years since Archie and Edith's wedding, although they apparently had communicated over the years via phone (two early episodes, "Cousin Oscar" and "Lionel Steps Out", depict phone conversations between Archie and Fred). Their long estrangement was fueled by the fact that Fred refused to attend their father's funeral, with Fred even describing him as "nuts about everything." In "The Return of Archie's Brother," the two seem to have reconciled, with Fred offering to invest $5,000 to put Archie's bar in a Syndicate|national syndicate. However, in Fred's return trip to visit Archie and Edith, he arrives with a beautiful 18-year-old wife named Katherine. This leads to a heated discussion, which erupts into an argument between Archie and Fred over "Age disparity in sexual relationships|May–September romances", with Archie even asking if the "truant off ...
