    File:Paddy Hill from the Birmingham Six.jpg|thumb|Paddy Hill in 2015 The "Birmingham Six" were six Irishmen who were each sentenced to life imprisonment in 1975 following their Miscarriage of justice|false convictions for the 1974 Birmingham pub bombings. Their convictions were declared miscarriage of justice|unsafe and unsatisfactory and quashed by the Court of Appeal of England and Wales#Criminal Division|Court of Appeal on 14 March 1991. The six men were later awarded financial compensation ranging from Pound sterling|£840,000 to £1.2 million. ==Birmingham pub bombings== The Birmingham pub bombings took place on 21 November 1974 and were attributed to the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA).Although the IRA denied that it was involved in the bombings two days after the event, and the IRA has never formally admitted responsibility for the Birmingham bomb, in 1985 a former IRA chief of staff, Joe Cahill, acknowledged the IRA's role, and 30 years after the bombings Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Féin, expressed his regrets about the bombings and the huge loss of life and injuries they inflicted (Chrisafis, Angelique. , "The Guardian" 22 November 2004, Staff.   "Irish Examiner" 22 November 2004).  - Patrick Hill, one of the Six, said in April 2012 that the Six had learned the names of the real bombers and claimed it was common knowledge among the upper echelons of both the IRA and the British government. Improvised explosive devices were placed in two central Birmingham pubs: the Mulberry Bush at the foot of the Rotunda (Birmingham)|Rotunda, and the Tavern in the Town – a basement pub in New Street, Birmingham|New Street. The resulting explosions, at 20:25 and 20:27, collectively were the most deadly attacks in the UK since World War II (until surpassed by the Denmark Place fire in 1980); 21 people were killed (ten at the Mulberry Bush and eleven at the Tavern in the Town) and 182 people were injured.  Six men were arrested: Hugh Callaghan, Patrick Joseph Hill, Gerard Hunter, Richard McIlkenny, William Power and John Walker. Five were Belfast-born, while John Walker was born in Derry. All six had lived in Birmingham since the 1960s. All the men except for Callaghan had left the city early on the evening of 21 November from Birmingham New Street railway station|New Street Station, shortly before the explosions. They were travelling to Belfast to attend the funeral of James McDade, an IRA volunteer (Irish republican)|member whom they all knew. McDade had accidentally killed himself on 14 November when his bomb detonated prematurely while he was planting it at a telephone exchange in Coventry.,  When they reached Heysham, Lancashire, they and others were subject to a Special Branch (Metropolitan Police)|Special Branch stop and search. The men did not tell the police of the true purpose of their visit to Belfast, a fact that was later held against them. While the search was in progress the police were informed of the Birmingham bombings. The men agreed to be taken to Morecambe, Lancashire, police station for forensic tests. On the morning of 22 November, after the forensic tests and questioning by the Morecambe police, the men were transferred to the custody of West Midlands Serious Crime Squad police unit.  Callaghan was taken into custody on the evening of 22 November. While the men were in the custody of the West Midlands Police they were allegedly starvation|deprived of food sleep deprivation|and sleep, and were sometimes interrogation|interrogated for as much as 12 hours without a break. Threats were made against them and they suffered abuse: punches, dogs being let loose within a foot of them, and a mock execution. William Power alleged that he was assaulted by members of Birmingham Criminal Investigation Department., cain.ulst.ac.uk; accessed 6 April 2017. Richard McIlkenny's daughter said, "When they (the family) saw him the next day, he had been so badly beaten he was unrecognisable." Power confessed while in Morecambe while Callaghan, Walker and McIlkenny confessed at Queens Road in Aston, Birmingham.  On 12 May 1975, the six men were criminal charge|charged with murder in English law|murder. Three other men, James Kelly, Mick Murray (Irish republican)|Mick Murray and Michael Sheehan, were charged with conspiracy. The trial began on 9 June 1975 at the Crown Court sitting at Lancaster Castle, before Nigel Bridge, Baron Bridge of Harwich|Mr Justice Bridge and a jury. After legal arguments the statements made in November were deemed admissible as evidence. The unreliability of these statements was later established. Kenneth Littlejohn#Thomas Watt|Thomas Watt provided circumstantial evidence about John Walker's association with Provisional IRA members.p229 Chris Mullin (politician)|Chris Mullin "Error of Judgement" Forensic scientist Dr Frank Skuse used positive Griess test results to claim that Hill and Power had handled explosives. Callaghan, Hunter, McIlkenny and Walker all had tested negative. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry|GCMS tests at a later date were negative for Power and contradicted the initial results for Hill. Skuse's claim that he was 99% certain that Power and Hill had explosives traces on their hands was opposed by defence expert Dr Hugh Kenneth Black of the Royal Institute of Chemistry, the former HM Chief Inspector of Explosives, Home Office. Skuse's evidence was clearly preferred by Bridge.R v McIlkenney (2019) 93 Cr.App.R. 287 The jury found the six men guilty of murder. On 15 August 1975, they were each sentenced to 21 life sentences.  On 28 November 1974, the men appeared in court for the second time after they had been remand (detention)|remanded into custody at Birmingham (HM Prison)|HM Prison Winson Green. All showed bruising and other signs of ill-treatment. Fourteen prison officers were charged with assault in June 1975, but were all acquitted at a trial presided over by Graham Swanwick|Mr. Justice Swanwick. The Six brought a civil claim for damages against the West Midlands Police in 1977, which was struck out on 17 January 1980 by the Court of Appeal (Civil Division), constituted by the Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning, Reginald Goff|Goff LJ and Sir George Baker,McIlkenny -v- Chief Constable of the West Midlands  QB 283 under the principle of issue estoppel|estoppel. UK Parliament publications Paragraph 86  In March 1976 their first application for leave to appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal, presided over by John Widgery, Baron Widgery|Lord Widgery Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales|CJ."Miscarriages of Justice"; Bob Woffinden (1987) Journalist Chris Mullin (politician)|Chris Mullin investigated the case for Granada Television|Granada TV's "World in Action" series. In 1985, the first of several "World in Action" programmes casting doubt on the men's convictions was broadcast. In 1986, Mullin's book, "Error of Judgment: The Truth About the Birmingham Pub Bombings", set out a detailed case supporting the men's claims that they were innocent. It included his claim to have met some of those who were actually responsible for the bombings. The Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, referred the case back to the Court of Appeal (England and Wales)|Court of Appeal. In January 1988, after a six-week hearing (at that time the longest criminal appeal hearing ever held), the convictions were ruled to be safe and satisfactory. The Court of Appeal, presided over by the Lord Chief Justice Geoffrey Lane, Baron Lane|Lord Lane, dismissed the appeals. Over the next three years, newspaper articles, television documentaries and books brought forward new evidence to question the safety of the convictions. Their second full appeal, in 1991, was allowed. Hunter was represented by Anthony Maurice Gifford, 6th Baron Gifford|Lord Gifford Queen's Counsel|QC, the others by Michael Mansfield QC. New evidence of police fabrication and suppression of evidence, the successful attacks on both the confessions and the 1975 forensic evidence caused the Crown to decide not to resist the appeals. The Court of Appeal, constituted by Lord Justices Lloyd, Mustill and Farquharson, stated that "in the light of the fresh scientific evidence, which at least throws grave doubt on Dr. Skuse's evidence, if it does not destroy it altogether, these convictions are both unsafe and unsatisfactory."R v McIlkenney (1991) 93 Cr.App.R. 287–318. On 14 March 1991 the six walked free. In 2001, a decade after their release, the six men were awarded compensation ranging from £840,000 to £1.2 million., "The Independent", 21 November 2014. Richard McIlkenny, one of the six men wrongly convicted of the Birmingham pub bombings, died of cancer on 21 May 2006, aged 73. He had returned to Ireland shortly after he was freed from prison, and died in hospital with his family at his bedside. McIlkenny was buried on 24 May in Celbridge|Celbridge, County Kildare. The other members of the Birmingham Six were present at his Wake (ceremony)|wake and funeral. Of the five surviving members of the Birmingham Six, Patrick Hill currently resides in Ayrshire; Gerard Hunter in Portugal; John Walker in Donegal (town)|Donegal; and both Hugh Callaghan and William Power in London., 9 March 2011.  The success of the appeals and other miscarriages of justice caused the Home Secretary to set up a Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1991. The commission reported in 1993 and led to the Criminal Appeal Act 1995 which established the Criminal Cases Review Commission in 1997.  Superintendent (police)|Superintendent George Reade and two other police officers were charged with perjury and conspiracy (crime)|conspiracy to perverting the course of justice|pervert the course of justice but were never prosecuted. During the inquests in England and Wales|inquest into the bombings in 2016, Hill stated that he knew the identities of three of the bombers who were still "free men" in Ireland. ==Granada Television productions== On 28 March 1990, ITV (TV network)|ITV broadcast the Granada Television docudrama, "Who Bombed Birmingham?", which re-enacted the bombings and subsequent key events in Chris Mullin (politician)|Chris Mullin's campaign. Written by Rob Ritchie and directed by Mike Beckham, it starred John Hurt as Mullin, Martin Shaw as "World in Action" producer Ian McBride, Ciarán Hinds as Richard McIlkenny, one of the Six, and Patrick Malahide as Michael Mansfield (QC).Simon Coward, Richard Down & Christopher Perry "The Kaleidoscope British Independent Television Drama Research Guide 1955–2010", Kaleidoscope Publishing, 2nd edition, 2010, p.3304,  It was repackaged for export as "The I ...
