    File:Alfred Lord Tennyson 1809-1892 poet lived here in 1880 and 1881.jpg|thumb|English Heritage blue plaque at 9 Upper Belgrave Street, Belgravia, London, commemorating Poet Laureate of the United Kingdom|British Poet Laureate Alfred, Lord Tennyson (erected 1994) Poet  Blue Plaques |url=https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/blue-plaques/alfred-tennyson/ |access-date=2023-01-17 |website=English Heritage}} A "blue plaque" is a permanent sign installed in a public place in the United Kingdom and elsewhere to commemorate a link between that location and a famous person, event, or former building on the site, serving as a historical marker. The term is used in the United Kingdom in two different senses. It may be used narrowly and specifically to refer to the "official" scheme administered by English Heritage, and currently restricted to sites within Greater London; or it may be used less formally to encompass a number of similar schemes administered by organisations throughout the UK.  The plaques erected are made in a variety of designs, shapes, materials and colours: some are blue, others are not. However, the term "blue plaque" is often used informally to encompass all such schemes. The "official" scheme traces its origins to that launched in 1866 in London, on the initiative of the politician William Ewart (British politician)|William Ewart, to mark the homes and workplaces of famous people. It has been administered successively by the Royal Society of Arts|Society of Arts (1866–1901), the London County Council (1901–1965), the Greater London Council (1965–1986) and English Heritage (1986 to date). It remains focused on London (now defined as Greater London), although between 1998 and 2005, under a trial programme since discontinued, 34 plaques were erected elsewhere in England. The first such scheme in the world, it has directly or indirectly provided the inspiration and model for many others. Many other plaque schemes have since been initiated in the United Kingdom. Some are restricted to a specific geographical area, others to a particular theme of historical commemoration. They are administered by a range of bodies including Local government|local authorities, Civic society|civic societies, residents' associations and other organisations such as the Transport Trust, the Royal Society of Chemistry, the Music Hall Guild of Great Britain and America, the Centre for Pagan Studies and the British Comic Society.  There are also commemorative plaque schemes throughout the world such as those in Paris, Rome, Oslo, Dublin; and in other cities in Australia, Canada, the Historical markers of the Philippines|Philippines, Russia and the United States. These take various forms, and they are more likely to be known as commemorative plaques or historical markers. == English Heritage scheme ==  The original blue plaque scheme was established by the Royal Society of Arts|Society of Arts in 1867, and since 1986 has been run by English Heritage. It is the oldest such scheme in the world. Since 1984 English Heritage have commissioned Frank Ashworth to make the plaques which have then been inscribed by his wife, Sue, at their home in Cornwall. English Heritage plans to erect an average of twelve new blue plaques each year in London.  After being conceived by politician William Ewart (British politician)|William Ewart in 1863, the scheme was initiated in 1866 by Ewart, Henry Cole and the Society of Arts (now the Royal Society of Arts),Hansard vol 172 17 July 1863 quoted in 'The commemoration of historians under the blue plaque scheme in London' by author Howard Spencer which erected plaques in a variety of shapes and colours. The first plaque was unveiled in 1867 to commemorate Lord Byron at his birthplace, 24 Holles Street, Cavendish Square. This house was demolished in 1889. The earliest blue plaque to survive, also put up in 1867, commemorates Napoleon III in King Street, St James's. Byron's plaque was blue, but the colour was changed by the manufacturer Mintons Ltd|Minton, Hollins & Co to chocolate brown to save money. The first woman to be honoured with a plaque was the actor Sarah Siddons in 1876. The plaque, placed on her house in Marylebone, London, was retrieved when the house was demolished in 1905 and is now held in the Victoria and Albert Museum. In total the Society of Arts put up 35 plaques, fewer than half of which survive today. The Society only erected one plaque within the square-mile of the City of London, that to Samuel Johnson on his Dr Johnson's House|house in Gough Square, in 1876. In 1879, it was agreed that the City of London Corporation would be responsible for erecting plaques within the City to recognise its jurisdictional independence. This demarcation has remained ever since. In 1901, the Society of Arts scheme was taken over by the London County Council (LCC), which gave much thought to the future design of the plaques. It was eventually decided to keep the basic shape and design of the Society's plaques, but to make them uniformly blue, with a laurel wreath and the LCC's title. Though this design was used consistently from 1903 to 1938, some experimentation occurred in the 1920s, and plaques were made in bronze, stone and lead. Shape and colour also varied. In 1921, the most common (blue) plaque design was revised, as it was discovered that glazed Royal Doulton stoneware was cheaper than the encaustic tile|encaustic formerly used. In 1938, a new plaque design was prepared by an unnamed student at the LCC's Central School of Arts and Crafts and was approved by the committee. It omitted the decorative elements of earlier plaque designs, and allowed for lettering to be better spaced and enlarged. A white border was added to the design shortly after, and this has remained the standard ever since. No plaques were erected between 1915 and 1919, or between 1940 and 1947, owing to the two world wars. The LCC formalised the selection criteria for the scheme in 1954. When the LCC was abolished in 1965, the scheme was taken over by the Greater London Council (GLC). The principles of the scheme changed little, but now applied to the entire, much larger, administrative county of Greater London. The GLC was also keen to broaden the range of people commemorated. The GLC erected 252 plaques, the subjects including Sylvia Pankhurst, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, and Mary Seacole. In 1986, the GLC was disbanded and the blue plaques scheme passed to English Heritage. English Heritage erected more than 300 plaques in London. In January 2013 English Heritage suspended proposals for plaques owing to funding cuts. The National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty|National Trust's chairman stated that his organisation might step in to save the scheme. In the event the scheme was relaunched by English Heritage in June 2014 with private funding (including support from a new donors' club, the Blue Plaques Club, and from property developer David Pearl (businessman)|David Pearl). Two members of the advisory panel, Professor David Edgerton (historian)|David Edgerton and author and critic Gillian Darley, resigned over this transmutation, concerned that the scheme had been "reduced to a marketing tool for English Heritage". In April 2015, English Heritage was divided into two parts, Historic England (a statutory body), and the new English Heritage Trust (a charity, which took over the English Heritage operating name and logo). Responsibility for the blue plaque scheme passed to the English Heritage Trust. <gallery widths="200" heights="170"> File:SamuelJohnsonPlaque.jpg|Society of Arts plaque on Samuel Johnson's Dr Johnson's House|house in Gough Square, London (erected 1876). Many of the early Society of Arts and LCC plaques were brown in colour. File:Dickens Plaque 1338.jpg|London County Council plaque at 48 Doughty Street, Holborn, commemorating Charles Dickens (erected 1903) File:ANTONIO CANAL CALLED CANALETTO (1697-1768) Venetian Painter Lived here.jpg|One of seven LCC Royal Doulton plaques with coloured laurel relief border erected in 1925; 41 Beak Street, Soho File:The blue plaque of William Bligh the commander of the Bounty.jpg|London County Council plaque at 100 Lambeth Road, Lambeth, commemorating William Bligh (erected 1952) File:Virginia Woolf (5025913403).jpg|Greater London Council plaque at 29 Fitzroy Square, Fitzrovia, commemorating Virginia Woolf (erected 1974) File:Ian Fleming - 22 Ebury Street Blue Plaque.jpg|English Heritage plaque, at 22b Ebury Street, Belgravia, London, commemorating Ian Fleming (erected 1996) </gallery>  File:The world's first regular high definition television service was inaugurated here by the BBC 2 November 1936.jpg|thumb|upright|Greater London Council event plaque at Alexandra Palace, commemorating the launch of BBC Television in 1936 (erected 1977)To be eligible for an English Heritage blue plaque in London, the famous person concerned must: * Have been dead for 20 years or have passed the centenary of their birth. Fictional characters are not eligible; * Be considered eminent by a majority of members of their own profession; have made an outstanding contribution to human welfare or happiness; * Have lived or worked in that building in London (excluding the City of London and Whitehall) for a significant period, in time or importance, within their life and work; be recognisable to the well-informed passer-by, or deserve national recognition. In cases of foreigners and overseas visitors, candidates should be of international reputation or significant standing in their own country. With regards to the location of a plaque: * Plaques can only be erected on the actual building inhabited by a figure, not the site where the building once stood, or on buildings that have been radically altered; * Plaques are not placed onto boundary walls, gate piers, educational or ecclesiastic buildings, or the Inns of Court; * Buildings marked with plaques should be visible from the public highway; * A single person may not be commemorated with more than one blue plaque in London. Other schemes have different criteria, which are often less restrictive: in particular, it is common under other schemes for plaques to be erected to mark the sites of demolished buildings.  File:Peter Ellis Plaque at 40 Falkner Square.JPG|thumb|upright|English Heritage plaque at 40 Falkner Square, Liverpool, commemorating Peter Ellis (architect)|Peter Ellis, architect (erected 2001) Almost all the proposals for English Heritage blue plaques are made by members of the public who write or email the organisation before submitting a formal proposal. English Heritage's in-house historian researches the proposal, an ...
