   | death_place = Los Angeles|Los Angeles, California, U.S. | known_for   =  | education   =  | employer    =  | occupation  =  | spouse      = Lilly Tartikoff|Lilly Samuels (1982–1997, his death) | children    = 2 }} "Brandon Tartikoff" (January 13, 1949 – August 27, 1997) was an American television executive who was the president of NBC from 1981 to 1991. He was credited with turning around NBC's low prime time reputation with such hit series as "Hill Street Blues", "L.A. Law", "Law & Order", "ALF (TV series)|ALF", "Family Ties", "The Cosby Show", "Cheers", "Seinfeld", "The Golden Girls", "Wings (1990 TV series)|Wings", "Miami Vice", "Knight Rider (1982 TV series)|Knight Rider", "The A-Team", "Saved by the Bell", "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air", "St. Elsewhere", and "Night Court". Tartikoff also helped develop the 1984 sitcom "Punky Brewster"; he named the title character after a girl he had a crush on in school. He was also involved in the creation of "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" and "Beggars and Choosers (TV series)|Beggars and Choosers". ==Biography==  Born to a American Jews|Jewish family  in Freeport, New York|Freeport, New York (state)|New York, Tartikoff was a graduate of the Lawrenceville School and Yale University, where he contributed to campus humor magazine "The Yale Record". While attending Yale, Tartikoff worked as an account executive and sales manager for WTNH|WNHC-TV in New Haven, Connecticut|New Haven, Connecticut, as well as in Hartford, Connecticut. Tartikoff spent vacations in Los Angeles looking for a job in network television. After graduating from Yale, he took a series of jobs in advertising and local television, including WLS-TV in Chicago, Illinois.  Tartikoff was hired as a program executive at American Broadcasting Company|ABC in 1976. One year later, he moved to NBC (after being hired by Dick Ebersol to direct comedy programming). Tartikoff took over programming duties at NBC from Fred Silverman in 1981. At age 32, Tartikoff became the youngest president of NBC's entertainment division. When Tartikoff took over, NBC was in last place behind ABC and CBS, and the very future of the network was in doubt. A writers' strike was looming, affiliates were defecting, mostly to ABC, and the network had only three prime time shows in the Top 20: "Little House on the Prairie (TV series)|Little House on the Prairie", "Diff'rent Strokes" and "Real People". Johnny Carson was reportedly in talks to move his landmark late-night talk show to ABC. The entire cast and writers of "Saturday Night Live" had left that late-night sketch-comedy series, and their replacements had received some of the show's worst critical notices (except for fellow cast members Eddie Murphy and Joe Piscopo who stayed with SNL until 1984).  By 1982, Tartikoff and his new superior, the highly regarded former producer Grant Tinker, slowly but surely turned the network's fortunes around. As head of NBC's Entertainment Division, Tartikoff's successes included "The Cosby Show", for which he had pursued Bill Cosby to create a pilot episode|pilot after having been impressed by Cosby's stories when Cosby guest-hosted "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson|The Tonight Show". Tartikoff wrote a brainstorming memorandum|memo that simply read "MTV police|cops", and later presented the memo to series creator Anthony Yerkovich, formerly a writer and producer for "Hill Street Blues". The result was "Miami Vice", which became an icon of 1980s pop culture. "Knight Rider (1982 TV series)|Knight Rider" was inspired by a perceived lack of leading men who could act, with Tartikoff suggesting that a talking car could fill in the gaps in any leading man's acting abilities. During the casting process of "Family Ties", Tartikoff was unexcited about Michael J. Fox for the role of Alex P. Keaton. However, the show's producer, Gary David Goldberg, insisted until Tartikoff relented saying, "Go ahead if you insist. But I'm telling you, this is not the kind of face you'll ever see on a lunch box." Some years later, after the movie "Back to the Future" cemented Fox's stardom, Fox goodnaturedly sent Tartikoff a lunch box with Fox's picture on it, with a handwritten note reading: "Brandon, They wanted me to put a Eat crow|crow in here, but&nbsp;... Love and Kisses, Michael J." Tartikoff kept the lunch box on display in his office. Jerry Seinfeld credited Tartikoff with saving "Seinfeld" from cancellation during its first four years of struggling ratings."The Howard Stern Show", June 26, 2014. SiriusXM. Johnny Carson broke the news of his retirement in February 1991 to Tartikoff at the Grille in Beverly Hills. For several days, only Tartikoff and NBC chairman Bob Wright knew of the planned retirement. Tartikoff wrote in his memoirs that his biggest professional regret was cancelling the series "Buffalo Bill (TV series)|Buffalo Bill", which he later went on to include in a fantasy "dream schedule" created for a "TV Guide" article that detailed his idea of "The Greatest Network Ever". =  During his time at NBC, he made appearances in several of the network's shows. He was played by David Leisure in "Prime Time," episode five of season two of "ALF (TV series)|ALF".https://tv.apple.com/gb/episode/prime-time/umc.cmc.1hxj8323teu1jqgd0xp2mn5my?showId=umc.cmc.1s2h8d83z7irdqri6umw9al0b In the penultimate scene when ALF suggests a sitcom about a family hosting a lovable alien, he replies "Not in a million years, pal, it's too far-fetched." He hosted "Saturday Night Live" in 1983 and appeared as himself in an episode of "Saved by the Bell", where he briefly entertains the notion of a "show about a high school principal and his kids", before scoffing at the idea. During his 1983 appearance on "Saturday Night Live", one skit featured Tartikoff in a black leather ensemble, with the words "Be There" spelled out in rhinestones on the back of his jacket. "Be There" was NBC's slogan during the 1983–84 season. Tartikoff appeared as himself on episodes of "Night Court" and "Night Stand with Dick Dietrick", and in the background of one of the final episodes of "Cheers".  He left NBC in 1991, moving to Paramount Pictures to become its chairman. A year later, Tartikoff left that post to spend more time with his daughter, Calla, who was injured in a car crash near the family's Lake Tahoe home. After he left Paramount, he started Moving Target Productions in 1992, and his first work was a joint effort with Universal Television|MCA TV in 1993. In 1994, he made his comeback to national TV with "Last Call", a short-lived late-night discussion show he produced. That same year he also produced "Steven Banks|The Steven Banks Show" for PBS. Later that year, he began a brief run as chairman of New World Communications|New World Entertainment, which happened from 1994 to 1996. Shortly after New World bought out Moving Target Productions, he renamed his production company to MT2 Services (short for "M"oving "T"arget "2"), and instrumental in developing "Strange Luck" for Fox Broadcasting Company|Fox and "Second Noah" for American Broadcasting Company|ABC. Through MT2 Services, he also developed the failed Marvel TV pilot "Generation X (film)|Generation X" for Fox. Just prior to his death, Tartikoff served as the chairman of the AOL project Entertainment Asylum, for which he teamed with Scott Zakarin to build the world's first interactive broadcast studio.  He also continued to do on-air appearances on shows such as "Dave's World" and "Arliss (TV series)|Arli$$". In 1996, he left New World Entertainment, following the announcement of its purchase by News Corporation, and then subsequently started H. Beale Company.  In 1982, Tartikoff married Lilly Tartikoff|Lilly Samuels and the couple had two daughters, Calla Lianne and Elizabeth Justine. In 1991, eight-year-old Calla suffered a severe brain injury in a car accident and received intense therapy in order to walk and speak again. Princess Calla on Disney's "The Gummi Bears" was named for Calla Tartikoff. Tartikoff's parents were survivors of the Tenerife airport disaster|collision of two 747s in Tenerife, Canary Islands, in 1977."Newsweek", March 1977.  Tartikoff died on August 27, 1997, at age 48 from Hodgkin lymphoma, a disease with which he had three separate bouts over 25 years. He was interred at Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles. The "Deep Space Nine" sixth-season premiere, "A Time to Stand", began with a title card reading "In memory of Brandon Tartikoff." A similar card appeared at the end of the ninth-season premiere of "Seinfeld", "The Butter Shave] ...
