      }}  The "Bridgewater Canal" connects Runcorn, Manchester and Leigh, Greater Manchester|Leigh, in North West England. It was commissioned by Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater, to transport coal from his mines in Worsley to Manchester. It was opened in 1761 from Worsley to Manchester, and later extended from Manchester to Runcorn, and then from Worsley to Leigh. The canal is connected to the Manchester Ship Canal via a lock at Cornbrook; to the Rochdale Canal in Manchester; to the Trent and Mersey Canal at Preston Brook, southeast of Runcorn; and to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Leigh. It once connected with the River Mersey at Runcorn but has since been cut off by a slip road to the Silver Jubilee Bridge. Following the re-routing of roads to the Silver Jubilee Bridge, the Runcorn Locks Restoration Society campaigns to reinstate the flight of locks. The Bridgewater canal is described as the first great achievement of the canal age, although the Sankey Canal opened earlier. Bridgewater captured the public imagination because of its engineering feats; it required the construction of an navigable aqueduct|aqueduct to cross the River Irwell, and a tunnel at Worsley. Its success helped inspire a period of intense canal building in Britain, known as Canal Mania. It later faced intense competition from the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and the Macclesfield Canal. Navigable throughout its history, it is one of the few canals in Britain not to have been nationalised, and remains privately owned. Pleasure craft now use the canal which forms part of the Cheshire Ring network of canals. == Design and construction == Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater, owned some of the coal mines dug to supply North West England with fuel for the steam engines instrumental in powering England's Industrial Revolution.  The duke transported his coal along the Mersey and Irwell Navigation and also by packhorse, but each method was inefficient and expensive; river transport was subject to the vagaries of river navigation,Vessels were affected by tide levels, and the shared use of water by industry and the amount of coal packhorses could carry was limited by its relative weight.  The duke's underground mines also suffered from persistent flooding, caused by the geology of the Middle Coal Measures, where the Worsley Four Foot mine|coal seam lies beneath a layer of permeable sandstone. Having visited the Canal du Midi in France and watched the construction of the Sankey Canal in England, the duke's solution to these problems was to build an underground canal at Worsley, connected to a surface canal between Worsley and Salford, Greater Manchester|Salford.  In addition to easing overland transport difficulties and providing drainage for his mines, an underground canal would provide a reliable source of water for the surface canal, and also eliminate the need to lift the coal to the surface (an expensive and difficult proposition). The canal boats would carry  at a time, pulled by only one horse&nbsp;– more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart.  The duke and his estate manager John Gilbert (agent)|John Gilbert produced a plan of the canal, and in 1759 obtained an Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom|Act of Parliament, enabling its construction. James Brindley was brought in for his technical expertise (having previously installed a pumping system at the nearby Wet Earth Colliery), and after a six-day visit suggested varying the route of the proposed canal away from Salford, instead taking it across the River Irwell to Stretford and thereon into Manchester.  This route would make connecting to any future canals much easier, and would also increase competition with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation company.Boughey, Joseph. (1998) Hadfield's British Canals, Sutton Publishing,   Brindley moved into Worsley Old Hall and spent 46&nbsp;days surveying the proposed route, which to cross the Irwell would require the construction of an aqueduct at Barton-upon-Irwell.  At the duke's behest, in January 1760 Brindley also travelled to London to give evidence before a parliamentary committee.  The duke therefore gained a second Act of Parliament, which superseded the original. Brindley's planned route began at Worsley and passed southeast through Eccles, Greater Manchester|Eccles, before turning south to cross the River Irwell on the Barton Aqueduct. From there it continued southeast along the edge of Trafford Park, and then east into Manchester. Although a connection with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation was included in the new Act, at Hulme Locks in Castlefield (on land previously occupied by Hulme Hall, Hulme|Hulme Hall), this was not completed until 1838. The terminus would be at Castlefield Basin, where the nearby River Medlock was to help supply the canal with water.  Boats would unload their cargoes inside the duke's purpose-built warehouse.  There were no locks in Brindley's design, demonstrating his ability as a competent engineer.  The Barton Aqueduct was built relatively quickly for the time; work commenced in September 1760 and the first boat crossed on 17&nbsp;July 1761. File:BrownManchesterMuralBridgewater.jpg|right|thumb|"The Opening of the Bridgewater Canal A.D. 1761" by Ford Madox Brown, one of "The Manchester Murals" at Manchester Town Hall File:Bridgewater Canal at Barton 1891.jpg|right|thumb|Brindley's aqueduct, replaced late in the 19th century The duke invested a large sum of money in the scheme. From Worsley to Manchester its construction cost £168,000 (equivalent to £}} in ), but its advantages over land and river transport meant that within a year of its opening in 1761, the price of coal in Manchester fell by about half.  This success helped inspire a period of intense canal building, known as Canal Mania. Along with its stone aqueduct at Barton-upon-Irwell, the Bridgewater Canal was considered a major engineering achievement. One commentator wrote that when finished, " will be the most extraordinary thing in the Kingdom, if not in Europe. The boats in some places are to go underground, and in other places over a navigable river, without communicating with its waters". In addition to the duke's warehouse at Manchester, more buildings were built by Brindley and extended to Alport Street (now called Deansgate).  The warehouses were of timber-frame design, with load-bearing hand-made brick walls, supported on cast iron posts. The duke's warehouse was badly damaged by fire in 1789 but was rebuilt. File:Bridgewater foundary.gif|thumb|right|Bridgewater Foundry at Patricroft, 1839  File:Borrow's Bridge 69 - geograph.org.uk - 2427824.jpg|thumb|Borrow's Bridge across the Runcorn extension of the Bridgewater Canal In September 1761, with his assistant Hugh Oldham, Brindley surveyed an extension from Longford Bridge to Hempstones, near Halton, Cheshire.  He assisted in obtaining Parliamentary approval for the Bridgewater Canal Extension Act of 1762An Act to enable the most noble Francis Duke of Bridgewater, to make a navigable cut or canal from Longford Bridge, in the township of Stretford, in the county palatine of Lancaster, to the River Mersey, at a place called the Hempstones, in the township of Halton, in the county of Chester. which allowed the construction of an extension to the canal, from Manchester, to the River Mersey at Runcorn.  Despite objections from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company, Royal assent was given on 24&nbsp;March 1762.  A junction, Waters Meeting, was created in Trafford Park, at which the new extension branched south through Stretford, Sale, Greater Manchester|Sale, Altrincham, Lymm and finally to Runcorn. In December 1761 Brindley undertook a survey of the route at Runcorn. His initial plan was to make the terminus at Hempstones, east of Runcorn Gap,<!-- where the Mersey narrows between the town of Runcorn and a promontory which was to later form part of the town of Widnes - not certain this is relevant so will leave hidden for now--> but following a study of the tides and depth of water there, he decided instead to build the terminus west of Runcorn Gap.  This change was designed to accommodate Mersey Flat|Mersey flats, although the low fixed bridges required that traffic on the canal be able to lower or unship their masts.  Runcorn basin was almost  above the Mersey, so a flight of ten locks, described as "the wonder of their time", was built to connect the two.  Nine locks had a fall of , with a fall at the river lock of more than  at low water. It allowed vessels to enter and leave the canal on any tide. The connection to the Mersey was made on 1&nbsp;January 1773.  The river's tidal action tended to deposit silt around the lower entrance to the locks, so to counteract this a channel, equipped with gates at each end and known as the Duke's Gut, was cut through the marshes upriver from the locks.  At high tide the gates were closed, and with the ebb of the tide were opened to release water, which scoured the silt from the entrance to the locks.  The cut created an island, known as Runcorn Island, crossed by Castle Bridge.It was known as Castle Bridge because it made a connection with a rocky promontory which had once been the site of a castle built by Ethelfleda to defend her kingdom of Mercia f ...
