 File:MarchantiophytaSp.NonDéterminéeFL3.jpg|thumb|"Marchantia", an example of a liverwort File:Moss (Bryophyta) on the forest floor in Broken Bow, Oklahoma.jpg|thumb|An example of moss (Bryophyta) on the forest floor in Broken Bow, Oklahoma The "Bryophyta" Sensu#Common_qualifiers|s.l. are a proposed taxonomic Division (biology)|division containing three groups of non-vascular land plants (embryophytes): the Marchantiophyta|liverworts, hornworts and mosses. Bryophyta Sensu#Common_qualifiers|s.s. consists of the mosses only. They are characteristically limited in size and prefer moist habitats although they can survive in drier environments. The bryophytes consist of about 20,000 plant species. Bryophytes produce enclosed reproductive structures (gametangia and sporangia), but they do not produce flowers or seeds. They reproduce sexually by spores and asexually by fragmentation or the production of Gemma (botany)|gemmae. Though bryophytes were considered a paraphyletic group in recent years, almost all of the most recent Phylogenetics|phylogenetic evidence supports the monophyly of this group, as originally classified by Wilhelm Philippe Schimper|Wilhelm Schimper in 1879. The term "bryophyte" comes . ==Terminology== The term "Bryophyta" was first suggested by Braun in 1864. Gilbert Morgan Smith|G.M. Smith placed this group between Algae and Pteridophyte|Pteridophyta. ==Features== The defining features of bryophytes are: * Their life cycles are dominated by a multicellular gametophyte stage * Their sporophytes are unbranched * They do not have a true vascular tissue containing lignin (although some have specialized tissues for the transport of water) == Habitat == Bryophytes exist in a wide variety of habitats. They can be found growing in a range of temperatures (cold arctics and in hot deserts), elevations (sea-level to alpine), and moisture (dry deserts to wet rain forests). Bryophytes can grow where vascularized plants cannot because they do not depend on roots for uptake of Plant nutrients in soil|nutrients from soil. Bryophytes can survive on rocks and bare soil. ==Life cycle==  File:Moss alternation of generations 03-2012.png|thumb|550px|The life cycle of a dioicous bryophyte. The gametophyte (haploid) structures are shown in green, the sporophyte (diploid) in brown. Like all land plants (embryophytes), bryophytes have biological life cycle|life cycles with alternation of generations. In each cycle, a haploid gametophyte, each of whose cells contains a fixed number of unpaired chromosomes, alternates with a diploid sporophyte, whose cell contain two sets of paired chromosomes. Gametophytes produce haploid sperm and eggs which fuse to form diploid zygotes that grow into sporophytes. Sporophytes produce haploid spores by meiosis, that grow into gametophytes. Bryophytes are gametophyte dominant, meaning that the more prominent, longer-lived plant is the haploid gametophyte. The diploid sporophytes appear only occasionally and remain attached to and nutritionally dependent on the gametophyte. In bryophytes, the sporophytes are always unbranched and produce a single sporangium (spore producing capsule), but each gametophyte can give rise to several sporophytes at once. The sporophyte develops differently in the three groups. Both mosses and hornworts have a meristem zone where cell division occur. In hornworts, the meristem starts at the base where the foot ends, and the division of cells is pushing the sporophyte body upwards. In mosses, the meristem is located between the capsule and the top of the stalk (seta), and produce cells downward, elongating the stalk and elevates the capsule. In liverworts the meristem is absent and the elongation of the sporophyte is caused almost exclusively by cell expansion. Liverworts, mosses and hornworts spend most of their lives as gametophytes. Gametangia (gamete-producing organs), Archegonium|archegonia and Antheridium|antheridia, are produced on the gametophytes, sometimes at the tips of shoots, in the axils of leaves or hidden under thalli. Some bryophytes, such as the liverwort "Marchantia", create elaborate structures to bear the gametangia that are called gametangiophores. Sperm are flagellated and must swim from the antheridia that produce them to archegonia which may be on a different plant. Arthropods can assist in transfer of sperm. Fertilized eggs become zygotes, which develop into sporophyte embryos inside the archegonia. Mature sporophytes remain attached to the gametophyte. They consist of a stalk called a seta and a single sporangium or capsule. Inside the sporangium, haploid spores are produced by meiosis. These are dispersed, most commonly by wind, and if they land in a suitable environment can develop into a new gametophyte. Thus bryophytes disperse by a combination of swimming sperm and spores, in a manner similar to lycophytes, ferns and other cryptogams. Liverwort §&nbsp;Life cycle|Moss#Life cycle|Hornwort#Life cycle}}  The arrangement of Antheridium|antheridia and Archegonium|archegonia on an individual bryophyte plant is usually constant within a species, although in some species it may depend on environmental conditions. The main division is between species in which the antheridia and archegonia occur on the same plant and those in which they occur on different plants. The term "monoicous" may be used where antheridia and archegonia occur on the same gametophyte and the term "dioicous" where they occur on different gametophytes. In seed plants, "plant reproductive morphology|monoecious" is used where flowers with anthers (microsporangia) and flowers with ovules (megasporangia) occur on the same sporophyte and "dioecy|dioecious" where they occur on different sporophytes. These terms occasionally may be used instead of "monoicous" and "dioicous" to describe bryophyte gametophytes. "Monoecious" and "monoicous" are both derived from the Greek for "one house", "dioecious" and "dioicous" from the Greek for two houses. The use of the "-oicy" terminology refers to the gametophyte sexuality of bryophytes as distinct from the sporophyte sexuality of seed plants. Monoicous plants are necessarily hermaphroditic, meaning that the same plant has both sexes. The exact arrangement of the antheridia and archegonia in monoicous plants varies. They may be borne on different shoots (autoicous or Heteroecious|autoecious), on the same shoot but not together in a common structure (paroicous or paroecious), or together in a common "inflorescence" (synoicous or synoecious). (Watson uses the "oecy" terms rather than the "oicy" terms.) Dioicous plants are "unisexual", meaning that the same plant has only one sex. All four patterns (autoicous, paroicous, synoicous and dioicous) occur in species of the moss genus "Bryum". ==Classification and phylogeny== File:Hornwort (3144429129).jpg|thumb|Hornworts were once believed to be the closest living relatives of the vascular plants. File:Bryophyte sp Moss 3.jpg|thumb|Mosses are one group of bryophytes. Traditionally, all living land plants without vascular tissues were classified in a single taxonomic group, often a phylum|division (or phylum). As early as 1879, the term Bryophyta was used by German bryologist Wilhelm Schimper to describe a group containing all three bryophyte clades (though at the time, hornworts were considered part of the liverworts). Although a 2005 study supported this traditional monophyletic view, by 2010 a broad consensus had emerged among systematists that bryophytes as a whole are not a natural group (i.e., are paraphyletic). However, a 2014 study concluded that these previous phylogenies, which were based on nucleic acid sequences, were subject to composition biases, and that, furthermore, phylogenies based on amino acid sequences suggested that the bryophytes are monophyletic after all. Since then, partially thanks to a proliferation of genomic and transcriptomic datasets, almost all phylogenetics studies based on nuclear and chloroplastic sequences have concluded that the bryophytes form a monophyletic group.{{Cite journal |last=Puttick |first=Mark N. |display-authors=etal |year=2018 |title=The Interrelationships of Land Plants and the Nature of the Ancestral Embryophyte ...
