  File:Cow_and_its_calf.jpg|alt=cow and a calf|thumb|300x300px|An Indian cow and its calf— a late 7th century sculpture from Uttar Pradesh|Uttar Pradesh, India Due to the multiple benefits from cattle, there are varying beliefs about cattle in societies and religions. In some regions, especially most Cattle slaughter in India|states of India, the slaughter of cattle is prohibited and their meat may be food and drink prohibitions|taboo. Cattle are considered sacred in Indian religions such as Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, and in Africa|African paganism. Cattle played other major roles in many religions, including those of ancient Egypt, ancient Greece, Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)|ancient Israel, ancient Rome. == In Indian religions ==  Legislation against cattle slaughter is in place throughout most states of India except Kerala, West Bengal and parts of the Northeast India|North-East.   File:Cow bas relief in Mamallapuram.jpg|thumb|150px|A bull bas relief, Mamallapuram Hinduism specifically considers the zebu ("Bos indicus") to be sacred. Respect for the lives of animals including cattle, diet in Hinduism and vegetarianism in India are based on the Hindu ethics. The Hindu ethics are driven by the core concept of Ahimsa, i.e. non-violence towards all beings, as mentioned in the Chandogya Upanishad (~ 800 BCE).Tähtinen, Unto (1976), "Ahimsa. Non-Violence in Indian Tradition", London: Rider, , pp. 1–6, 107-109. By mid 1st millennium BCE, all three major religions – Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism – were championing non-violence as an ethical value, and something that impacted one's rebirth. According to Harris, by about 200 CE, food and feasting on animal slaughter were widely considered as a form of violence against life forms, and became a religious and social taboo.Marvin Harris (1990),  , Anthropology: contemporary perspectives, 6th edition, Editors: Phillip Whitten & David Hunter, Scott Foresman, , pages 201–204 India, which has Demographics of India#Religious demographics|79.80% Hindu population as of (2011 Census of India|2011 census), had the lowest rate of meat consumption in the world according to the 2007 UN FAO statistics, and India has more vegetarians than the rest of the world put together. According to Ludwig Alsdorf, "Indian vegetarianism is unequivocally based on "ahimsa" (non-violence)" as evidenced by ancient "smritis" and other ancient texts of Hinduism." He adds that the endearment and respect for cattle in Hinduism is more than a commitment to vegetarianism and has become integral to its theology. The respect for cattle is widespread but not universal. According to Chris Fuller (academic)|Christopher Fuller, animal sacrifices have been rare among the Hindus outside a few eastern states. To the majority of modern Indians, states Alsdorf, respect for cattle and disrespect for slaughter is a part of their ethos and there is "no "ahimsa" without renunciation of meat consumption". Several scholars explain the veneration for cows among Hindus in economic terms, including the importance of dairy in the diet, the use of cow dung as fuel and fertilizer, and the importance that cattle have historically played in agriculture., Margo DeMello, p.314, Columbia University Press, 2012 Ancient texts such as Rig Veda, Puranas highlight the importance of cattle. The scope, extent and status of cows throughout ancient India is a subject of debate. According to D. N. Jha, cattle, including cows, were neither inviolable nor as revered in ancient times as they were later.Jha, Dwijendra Narayan. "The Myth of the Holy Cow". London/New York: Verso 2002 A "Grhyasutra|Gryhasutra" recommends that beef be eaten by the mourners after a funeral ceremony as a ritual rite of passage. In contrast, according to Marvin Harris, the Vedas|Vedic literature is contradictory, with some suggesting ritual slaughter and meat consumption, while others suggesting a taboo on meat eating. =  File:Sri Mariamman Temple Singapore amk.jpg|thumb|The Hindu god Krishna is often shown with cows listening to his music. File:Mahimsyat.sarva.bhutani(veda).jpg|thumbnail|The calf (animal)|calf is compared with the dawn, in Hinduism. Here, with a sadhu. Many ancient and medieval Hindu texts debate the rationale for a voluntary stop to cow slaughter and the pursuit of Vegetarianism in Hinduism|vegetarianism as a part of a general abstention from violence against others and all killing of animals. The interdiction of the meat of the bounteous cow as food was regarded as the first step to total vegetarianism. Dairy cows are called "aghnya" "that which may not be slaughtered" in Rigveda. Yaska, the early commentator of the Rigveda, gives nine names for cow, the first being "aghnya".V.M. Apte, "Religion and Philosophy, The Vedic Age" According to Harris, the literature relating to cow veneration became common in 1st millennium CE, and by about 1000 CE vegetarianism, along with a taboo against beef, became a well accepted mainstream Hindu tradition. This practice was inspired by the beliefs in Hinduism that a soul is present in all living beings, life in all its forms is interconnected, and non-violence towards all creatures is the highest ethical value. Vegetarianism is a part of the Hindu culture. The god Krishna and his Yadav kinsmen are associated with cows, adding to its endearment. According to Nanditha Krishna the cow veneration in ancient India during the Vedic era, the religious texts written during this period called for non-violence towards all bipeds and quadrupeds, and often equated killing of a cow with the killing of a human being specifically a Brahmin. Nanditha Krishna stated that the hymn 8.3.25 of the Hindu scripture "Atharvaveda" (~1200–1500 BCE) condemns all killings of men, cattle, and horses, and prays to god Agni to punish those who kill., Wikisource, Quote: "यः पौरुषेयेण क्रविषा समङ्क्ते यो अश्व्येन पशुना यातुधानः। यो अघ्न्याया भरति क्षीरमग्ने तेषां शीर्षाणि हरसापि वृश्च॥१६॥" File:Prithu - Crop.jpg|thumb|Prithu chasing Prithvi, who is in the form of a cow. Prithu milked the cow to generate crops for humans. In Puranas, which are part of the Hindu texts, the earth-goddess Prithvi was in the form of a cow, successively milked of beneficent substances for the benefit of humans, by deities starting with the first sovereign: Prithu milked the cow to generate crops for humans to end a famine. Kamadhenu, the miraculous "cow of plenty" and the "mother of cows" in certain versions of the Hindu mythology, is believed to represent the generic sacred cow, regarded as the source of all prosperity. In the 19th century, a form of Kamadhenu was depicted in poster-art that depicted all major gods and goddesses in it. Govatsa Dwadashi which marks the first day of Diwali celebrations, is the main festival connected to the veneration and worship of cows as chief source of livelihood and religious sanctity in India, wherein the symbolism of motherhood is most apparent with the sacred cows Kamadhenu and her daughter Nandini.   File:Sacred cow2.jpg|thumb|A pamphlet protesting cow slaughter, first created in 1893. A meat eater ("mansahari") is shown as a demon with sword, with a man telling him "don't kill, cow is life-source for all". It was interpreted by Muslims in British Raj to be representing them. Redrawn the Raja Ravi Varma (c. 1897). The reverence for the cow played a role in the Indian Rebellion of 1857 against the British East India Company. Hindu and Muslim sepoys in the army of the East India Company came to believe that their paper cartridges, which held a measured amount of gunpowder, were greased with cow and pig fat. The consumption of swine is forbidden in Islam and Judaism. Because loading the gun required biting off the end of the paper cartridge, they concluded that the British India|British were forcing them to break edicts of their religion. A historical survey of major communal riots in India between 1717 and 1977 revealed that 22 out of 167 incidents of Religious violence in India|rioting between Hindus and Muslims were attributable directly to cow slaughter.&l ...
