   "Chinampa" ( ) is a technique used in Agriculture in Mesoamerica|Mesoamerican agriculture which relies on small, rectangle|rectangular areas of fertility (soil)|fertile arable land to grow agriculture|crops on the shallow lake beds in the Valley of Mexico. They are built up on wetlands of a lake or freshwater swamp for agricultural purposes, and their proportions ensure optimal moisture retention.Rabiela, Teresa Rojas. "Chinampa Agriculture." In David Carrasco|Davíd Carrasco (ed)."The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures". : Oxford University Press, 2001.  The United Nations designated it a Globally Important Agricultural Heritage System in 2018. The Aztecs created the very first Chinampa. File:camas chinampas.jpg|thumb|300px|right|Modern "chinampas" File:Lake Texcoco c 1519.png|thumb|right|300px|The lake system within the Valley of Mexico at the time of the Spanish Conquest of the Aztec Empire, showing distribution of the chinampas. Although different technologies existed during the Post-classical history|Post-classic and Colonial periods in the basin, chinampas have raised many questions on agricultural production and political development. After the Aztec Empire|Aztec Triple Alliance formed, the conquest of southern basin city-states, such as Xochimilco, was one of the first strategies of imperial expansion. Before this time, farmers maintained small-scale chinampas adjacent to their households and communities in the freshwater lakes of Xochimilco and Chalco. Chinampas were invented by the Aztec civilization. Sometimes referred to as "floating gardens," chinampas are artificial islands that were created by interweaving reeds with stakes beneath the lake's surface, creating underwater fences. A buildup of soil and aquatic vegetation would be piled into these "fences" until the top layer of soil was visible on the water's surface.  When creating chinampas, in addition to building up masses of land, a drainage system was developed. This drainage system was multi-purposed. A ditch was created to allow for the flow of water and sediments (likely including night soil).Pedro Armillas, "Mesoamerica" in "A History of Land Use in Arid Regions", L. Dudley Stamp, ed. Paris: UNESCO 1961, 266-67. Over time, the ditch would slowly accumulate piles of mud. This mud would then be dug up and placed on top of the chinampas, clearing the blockage. The soil from the bottom of the lake was also rich in nutrients, thus acting as an efficient and effective way of fertilizing the chinampas.Baquedano, E. (1993). "Aztec Inca & Maya. A Dorling Kindersley Book:" Singapore.  Replenishing the topsoil with lost nutrients provided for bountiful harvests. Embarcadero-Jiménez and colleagues tested the correlation between environmental parameters and bacterial diversity in the soil. It is speculated that a diverse array of bacteria can affect the nutrients in the soil. The results found that bacterial diversity was more abundant in cultivated soils than non-cultivated soils.  Also, "the structure of the bacterial communities showed that the chinampas are a transition system between sediment and soil and revealed an interesting association of the S-cycle and iron-oxidizing bacteria with the rhizosphere of plants grown in the chinampa soil". Evidence from Nahuatl wills from late seventeenth-century Colhuacan (altepetl)|Pueblo Culhuacán suggests chinampas were measured in "matl" (one matl = 1.67 meters), often listed in groups of seven.Cline, "Colonial Culhuacan", pp. 134-35. One scholar has calculated the size of chinampas using Aztec_codices | Codex Vergara as a source, finding that they usually measured roughly . In Tenochtitlan, the chinampas ranged from  to Tompkins, P. (1976). "Mysteries of the Mexican pyramids. Fitzhenry & Whiteside Limited:" Toronto. pp. 299  They were created by staking out the shallow lake bed and then fencing in the rectangle with Wattle (construction)|wattle.  The fenced-off area was then layered with mud, lake sediment, and decaying vegetation, eventually bringing it above the level of the lake.  Often trees such as "āhuexōtl"  ("Salix bonplandiana") (a willow) and "āhuēhuētl"  ("Taxodium mucronatum") (a cypress) were planted at the corners to secure the chinampa.  In some places, the long raised beds had ditches in between them, giving plants continuous access to water and making crops grown there independent of rainfall.Cline, "Colonial Culhuacan" p. 2. Chinampas were separated by channels wide enough for a canoe to pass.  These raised, well-watered beds had very high crop yields with up to 7 harvests a year. Chinampas were commonly used in pre-colonial Mexico and Central America. There is evidence that the Nahua settlement of Culhuacan, on the south side of the Ixtapalapa peninsula that divided Lake Texcoco from Lake Xochimilco, constructed the first chinampas in C.E. 1100.Richard Blanton, "Prehispanic Settlement Patterns of the Ixtapalapa Peninsula Region, Mexico." Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan 1970. ==History== File:The Digital Edition of the Florentine Codex Book 1 0640 Seeding, tilling and harvesting maize.tif|thumb|left|Aztec maize agriculture as depicted in the Florentine Codex with the cultivator using a digging stick The earliest fields that have been securely dated are from the Mesoamerican chronology|Middle Postclassic period, 1150 – 1350 Common Era|CE. Chinampas were used primarily in Lakes Lake Xochimilco|Xochimilco and Lake Chalco|Chalco near the spring (hydrosphere)|springs that lined the south shore of those lakes. The Aztecs not only conducted military campaigns to obtain control over these regions but, according to some researchers, undertook significant state-led efforts to increase their extent.Since many of the chinampas regions show a uniformity of size and orientation, researchers such as Townsend assume they were constructed by "a planned program . . . over a short time". (p 167) There is some strong evidence to suggest state-led operations for the “expansion” of the chinampas. This is sometimes referred to as the hydraulic hypothesis, which is directly related to a hydraulic empire, which is an empire that maintains power and control through the regulation and distribution of water. There is evidence to support the idea of state involvement, primarily the amount of manpower and materials it would take to build, turn, and maintain the chinampas. However, arguments about state control of the chinampas rely upon the assumption that dikes were necessary to control the water levels and to keep the saline water of Lake Texcoco away from the freshwater of the chinampa zone. This is plausible, but there is evidence that the chinampas were functional before the construction of a dike that protected them from the saline water. It is suggested that the dike was meant to drastically improve the size of the chinampa operation. Chinampa farms also ringed Tenochtitlán, the Aztec capital, which was considerably enlarged over time. Smaller-scale farms have also been identified near the island-city of Xaltocan and on the east side of Lake Texcoco. With the destruction of the dams and sluice gates during the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, many chinampas fields were abandoned. However, many lakeshore towns retained their chinampas through the end of the colonial era since cultivation was highly labor-intensive and less attractive for Spaniards to acquire.Charles Gibson, "The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule". Stanford: Stanford University Press 1964. File:Chinampas.jpg|thumb|right|Chinampas and canals, 1912. File:Trajinera en canal Nativitas.jpg|thumb|right|Trajinera tourist boat in Xochimilco The Aztecs built Tenochtitlan on an island around 1325. Issues arose when the cities' constant expansion eventually caused them to run out of room to build. As the empire grew, more sources of food were required. At times this meant conquering more land; at other times it meant expanding the chinampa system. With this expansion, chinampas' multiple crops per year became a large factor in the production and supply of food. Empirical records suggest that farmers had a relatively light tribute to pay compared to others because the annual tribute may have been only a fraction of the amount necessary for local needs. The extent to which Tenochtitlan depended on chinampas for its fresh food supply has been the topic of a number of scholarly studies.Edward E. Calnek, "The Organization of Urban Food Supply Systems: The Case of Tenochtitlan" in "Las ciudades de América Latina y sus áreas de influencia a través de la historia", Jorge Hardoy and Richard P. Schaedel, eds. Buenos Aires: Sociedad Interamericana de Planificación 1975.Edward E. Calnek, "El sistema de mercado de Tenochtitlan," in "Política e ideología en el México prehispánico," Pedro Carrasco and Johanna Broda, eds. Mexico: Editorial Nueva Imagen, 1978, pp. 97-114."Jeffrey R. Parsons, "The Role of Chinampa Agriculture in the Food Supply of Aztec Tenochtitlan," in "Cultural Change and Continuity", Charles Clelland, editor. New York: Academic Press 1976, 242. Among the crops grown on chinampas were maize, beans, Squash (plant)|squash, amaranth, tomatoes, chili peppers, and flowers.Van Tuerenhout, Dirk R. (2005). , p. 106. ABC-CLIO, Inc. Maize was planted with digging stick "huictli"  with a wooden blade on one end.Teresa Rabiela Rojas, "Agricultural Implements in Mesoamerica," in "Explorations in Ethnohistory", H.R. Harvey and Hanns J. Prem, eds. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1984 The word "chinampa" comes from the Nahuatl word "chināmitl", meaning "square made of canes" and the Nahuatl locative, "pan." In documentation by Spaniards, they used the word "camellones", "ridges between the rows."Cline, "Colonial Culhuacan", p. 132. However, Franciscan Fray Juan de Torquemada described them with the Nahua term, chinampa, saying "without much trouble  plant and harvest their maize and greens, for all over there are ridges called chinampas; these were strips built above water and surrounded by ditches, which obviates watering."Juan de Torquemada, "Monarquia Indiana", vol. 2, 483. Mexico: Editorial Porrúa 1975. Chinampas are depicted in pictorial Aztec codices, including Codex Vergara, Codex Santa María Asunción, the so-called Uppsala Map,Sigvald Linné, "El valle y la ciudad de México en 1550. Relación histórico fundada sobre un mapa geográfico, que se conserva en la biblioteca de la Universidad de Uppsala ". Stockholm 1948. and the Maguey Plan (from Azcapotzalco). In alphabetic Nahuatl documentation, "The T ...
