 Chinook}}   "Chinookan peoples" include several groups of Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast|Indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest in the United States who speak the Chinookan languages. Since at least 4000 BCE Chinookan peoples have resided along the Columbia River|Lower and Middle Columbia River (Wimahl) (″Great River″) from the river's gorge (near the present town of The Dalles, Oregon) downstream (west) to the river's mouth, and along adjacent portions of the coasts, from Tillamook Head of present-day Oregon in the south, north to Willapa Bay in southwest Washington (state)|Washington. In 1805 the Lewis and Clark Expedition encountered the Chinook Tribe on the lower Columbia. The term "Chinook" also has a wider meaning in reference to the Chinook Jargon, which is based on Chinookan languages, in part, and so the term "Chinookan" was coined by linguists to distinguish the older language from its offspring, Chinook Jargon|Chinuk Wawa. There are several theories about where the name ″Chinook″ came from. Some say it is a Chehalis people|Chehalis word "Tsinúk" for the inhabitants of and a particular village site on Baker Bay, or "Fish Eaters". It may also be a word meaning "strong fighters". Some Chinookan peoples are part of several federally recognized Tribes: the Yakama Nation (primarily Wasco-Wishram|Wishram), the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation (primarily Wasco-Wishram|Wasco), Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community of Oregon|Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community, and the , consisting of the Cathlamet, Clatsop, Lower Chinook, Wahkiakum, and Willapa Chinooks. The Chinook Indian Nation, consisting of the five westernmost Tribes of Chinookan peoples, Lower Chinook, Clatsop, Willapa, Wahkiakum and Kathlamet is currently (2023) working to restore Federally recognized tribe|federal recognition. The Chinook Nation gained Federal Recognition on January 3, 2001 from the United States Department of the Interior|Department of Interior under President Bill Clinton. After President George W. Bush was elected, his political appointees reviewed the case and, in a highly unusual action, revoked the recognition. The Chinook Nation sought Congressional support for recognition by the legislature in 2008 with a Bill Introduced by Brian Baird. The Bill died in Congress. The unrecognized "Tchinouk Indians of Oregon" trace their Chinook ancestry to two Chinook women who married French Canadians traders from the Hudson's Bay Company prior to 1830. The specific Chinook band these women were from or if they were Lower or Upper Chinook could not be determined. These individuals, settled in the French Prairie region of northwestern Oregon, becoming part of the community of French-Canadians and Métis in the United States|Métis (Mix-Bloods). There is no evidence that they are a distinct Indian community within French Prairie. The Chinook Indian Nation denied that the Tchinouk had any common history with them or any organizational affiliation. On January 16, 1986, the Bureau of Indian Affairs determined that the Tchinouk Indians of Oregon do not meet the requirements necessary to be a federally recognized tribe. The unrecognized "Clatsop-Nehalem Confederate Tribes" was formed in 2000.https://egov.sos.state.or.us/br/pkg_web_name_srch_inq.show_detl?p_be_rsn=233779&p_srce=BR_INQ&p_print=FALSE The Clatsop-Nehalem have approximately 130 members and claim to have Chinookan and Salish-speaking Tillamook people|Tillamook (Nehalem) ancestry. This is contested by the Chinook Indian Nation. The Indian Claims Commission, Docket 234, found, in 1957, that the Clatsop Chinooks were part of the Chinook Indian Nation. The Indian Claims Commission also found in Docket 240, 1962, that the Nehalem people were part of the Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians. ==Historic culture==  The Chinookan peoples were relatively settled and occupied traditional tribal geographic areas, where they hunted and fished; salmon was a mainstay of their diet. The women also gathered and processed many nuts, seeds, roots and other foods. They had a society marked by social stratification, consisting of a number of distinct social castes of greater or lesser status.Robert H. Ruby and John A. Brown, "Indian Slavery in the Pacific Northwest." Spokane, WA: Arthur H. Clark Company, 1993; pg. 42. Upper castes included shamans, warriors, and successful traders. They composed a minority of the community population compared to common members. Members of the superior castes are said to have practiced social discrimination, limiting contact with commoners and forbidding play between the children of the different social groups.Ruby and Brown, "Indian Slavery in the Pacific Northwest," p. 43. Some Chinookan peoples practiced slavery, a practice borrowed from the northernmost tribes of the Pacific Northwest.Ruby and Brown, "Indian Slavery in the Pacific Northwest," p. 39. They took slaves as captives in warfare, and used them to practice thievery on behalf of their masters. The latter refrained from such practices as unworthy of high status. File:Kane Flathead Child.jpg|thumb|upright|left|Chinook child undergoing process of flattening the head. The elite of some tribes had the practice of head binding, flattening their children's forehead and top of the skull as a mark of social status. They bound the infant's head under pressure between boards when the infant was about 3 months old and continued until the child was about one year of age.Ruby and Brown, "Indian Slavery in the Pacific Northwest," pg. 47. This custom was a means of marking social hierarchy; flat-headed community members had a rank above those with round heads. Those with flattened skulls refused to enslave other persons who were similarly marked, thereby reinforcing the association of a round head with servility. The Chinook were known colloquially by early white explorers in the region as "Flathead Indians". Living near the coast of the Pacific Ocean, the Chinook were skilled elk hunters and fishermen. The most popular fish was salmon. Owing partly to their settled living patterns, the Chinook and other coastal tribes had relatively little conflict over land, as they did not migrate through each other's territories and they had rich resources in the natural environment. In the manner of numerous settled tribes, the Chinook resided in longhouses. More than fifty people, related through extended kinship, often resided in one longhouse. Their longhouses were made of planks made from red cedar trees. The houses were about 20–60 feet wide and 50–150 feet long.  = In 1888 he published, "" a journal discussing American Folklore, here he describes some “Chinook Songs” and offers them in both the Chinook language and English translation. "" collection of Chinook legends and stories written and collected by Franz Boas in 1893, it was a collection of different Chinook Folklore taken from his time spent with the Chinookan people between the years of 1890 and 1891 during his summer trips to Oregon and Washington. Published in 1894, famed American/German anthropologist, Franz Boas, wrote the “”. In this reference book Boas includes various, Myths, Beliefs, Customs, Tales, and Historical Tales, as told by the Chinookan people themselves. = George Gibbs another popular anthropologist of his time, collected . He was assisted by Robert Shortess and Soloman H. Smith of Oregon and A.C. Anderson of Victoria, Vancouver Island. The many words were collected and scattered from various different tribes given the scarcity of the Chinookan people at the time. The book was mainly written for trading purposes and Gibbs collected the majority of his translation from the traders themselves. ==Chinook people today== File:Chinook.png|350px|right|thumb|Map of traditional Chinook tribal territory. The Chinookan peoples have long had a community on the lower Columbia River. These lower Columbia Chinook tribes and bands re-organized in the 20th century, setting up an elected form of government and reviving tribal culture. They first sought recognition as a federally recognized sovereign tribe in the late 20th century, as this would provide certain treaty-promised benefits for education and welfare. The Department of Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs rejected their application in 1997. Since the late 20th century, the Chinook Indian Nation has engaged in a continuing effort to secure formal recognition, conducting research and developing documentation to demonstrate its history. They are referred to in government and historic accounts, but treaties signed at Tansy Point in 1851 were not acted upon by Congress through a formal ratification process. This inaction caused the Chinook territories defined in the treaties to remain unceded. Nevertheless, these territories were taken by the federal government. If Congress had formally ratified the treaties, a reservation would have been established, which would have meant automatic recognition. In 2001, the U.S. Department of Interior recognized the Chinook Indian Nation, a confederation of the Cathlamet, Clatsop, Lower Chinook, Wahkiakum and Willapa Indians, as a tribe, according to its rules established in consultation with other recognized tribes. The tribe had documented continuity of their community over time on the lower Columbia. This recognition was announced during the last months of the administration of President Bill Clinton. Since the 1930s, individual Chinook people have had Dawes Act|Allotments on the timber-rich Quinault Reservation in Grays Harbor County, Washington. The Quinault appealed recognition of the Chinook in August 2001, and the matter was taken up by the new administration., "The Daily News (TDN)," 6 July 2002; accessed 25 November 2016 After President George W. Bush was elected, his new political appointees reviewed the Chinook materials. In 2002, in a highly unusual action, they revoked the recognition of the Chinook and of two other tribes also approved by the previous administration.For the 2001 recognition, see 66 "Federal Register" 1690 (2001) at  ; for the subsequent reversal, see 67 "Federal Register" 46204 (2002) at  Efforts by Brian Baird, D-Wash. from Washington's 3rd congressional district, to gain passage of legislation in 2011 to achieve recognition of the tribe were not successful. In his decision on a lawsuit filed in late 2017, U.S. District Court Judge Ronald B. Leighton ruled recognition could only be granted from Congress and other branches of government, but largely sided with the tribe; Leighton denied seven of eight claims by the Interior Department to dismiss the case, including a challenge to a 2015 rule that bars tribes from seeking recognition again.{{Cite web|url=https://www.opb.org/news/article/chinook-tribe-recognition-claim-advance-judge/|title=Chinook Tribe A Step Closer To Recogn ...
