 Common Good}} In philosophy, economics, and political science, the "common good" (also "Commonwealth", "general welfare", or "public benefit") is either what is shared and beneficial for all or most members of a given community, or alternatively, what is achieved by citizenship, collective action, and active participation in the realm of politics and public service. The concept of the common good differs significantly among List of philosophies|philosophical doctrines. Early conceptions of the common good were set out by Ancient Greece|Ancient Greek philosophers, including Aristotle and Plato. One understanding of the common good rooted in Aristotelianism|Aristotle's philosophy remains in common usage today, referring to what one contemporary scholar calls the "good proper to, and attainable only by, the community, yet individually shared by its members." The concept of common good developed through the work of political theorists, moral philosophers, and public economists, including Thomas Aquinas, Niccolò Machiavelli, John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, James Madison, Adam Smith, Karl Marx, John Stuart Mill, John Maynard Keynes, John Rawls, and many other thinkers. In contemporary economic theory, "a" common good is any good which is rivalrous yet non-excludable, while "the" common good, by contrast, arises in the subfield of welfare economics and refers to the outcome of a social welfare function. Such a social welfare function, in turn, would be rooted in a moral theory of the good (such as utilitarianism). Social choice theory aims to understand processes by which the common good may or may not be realized in societies through the study of Group decision-making|collective decision rules. Public choice theory applies Microeconomics|microeconomic methodology to the study of political science in order to explain how private interests affect political activities and outcomes. ==Definition== The term "common good" has been used in many disparate ways and escapes a single definition. Most philosophical conceptions of the common good fall into one of two families: substantive and procedural. According to substantive conceptions, the common good is that which is shared by and beneficial to all or most members of a given community: particular substantive conceptions will specify precisely what factors or values are beneficial and shared. According to procedural formulations, by contrast, the common good consists of the outcome that is achieved through collective participation in the formation of a shared will. It is when one another respects others dignity and rights. ==In the history of moral and political thought==  Under one name or another, the common good has been a recurring theme throughout the history of political philosophy. As one contemporary scholar observes, Aristotle used the idea of "the common interest" ("to koinei sympheron," in Greek language|Greek) as the basis for his distinction between "right" constitutions, which are in the common interest, and "wrong" constitutions, which are in the interest of rulers; Thomas Aquinas|Saint Thomas Aquinas held "the common good" ("bonum commune," in Latin) to be the goal of law and government; John Locke declared that "the peace, safety, and public good of the people" are the goals of political society, and further argued that "the well being of the people shall be the supreme law"; David Hume contended that "social conventions" are adopted and given moral support in virtue of the fact that they serve the "public" or "common" interest; James Madison wrote of the "public," "common," or "general" good as closely tied with justice and declared that justice is the end of government and civil society; and Jean-Jacques Rousseau understood "the common good" ("le bien commun", in French language|French) to be the object of a society's general will and the highest end pursued by government. Though these thinkers differed significantly in their views of what the common good consists in, as well as over what the state should do to promote it, they nonetheless agreed that the common good is the end of government, that it is a good of all the citizens, and that no government should become the "perverted servant of special interests," whether these special interests be understood as Aristotle's "interest of the rulers," Locke's "private good," Hume's and Madison's "interested factions," or Rousseau's "particular wills."  For the Ancient Greece|Ancient Greeks, the Common Good was the flourishing of the hierarchical network of people, known as the Polis#The_polis_in_Ancient_Greek_philosophy|polis (one's city, or state).   The phrase "common good" then, doesn't appear in texts of Plato, but instead the phrase "the good of a city."  In "The Republic (Plato)|The Republic", Plato's character Socrates contends repeatedly that a particular common goal exists in politics and society, and that that goal is the same as the goal for a flourishing human being, namely, to be a philosopher king, ruled by the highest good, Reason, rather than one of Plato's four lesser goods: honor-seeking, money-making, pleasure-seeking, or empassioned addiction.  For Plato, the best political order is one in which the entire society submits to the dictates of the leaders' faculty of Reason, even communism|communistically holding possessions, wives, and children in common, creating a "cohesion and unity" that "result from the common feelings of pleasure and pain which you get when all members of a society are glad or sorry for the same successes and failures." Plato's student Aristotle, considered by many to be the father of the idea of a common good, uses the concept of "the common interest" ("to koinei sympheron," in Greek language|Greek) as the basis for his distinction between his three "right" constitutions, which are in the common interest, and "wrong" constitutions, which are in the interest of rulers. To Aristotle, Plato is wrong about the desire to simply impose top-down unity; for Aristotle, a common good is synthesized upwardly/teleologically from the lesser goods of individuals, and their various kinds of larger-and-larger partnerships: marital couple, or parent-over-child, or master-over-slave; household; then village; then state.  In this teleological view, the good stems from objective facts about human life and purpose, which may vary, depending upon peoples' occupations, virtue-levels, etc.  However, noting that only citizens have the salvation (common good) of the city at heart, Aristotle argues that, regardless of form of government,  those who have more of a rational understanding of the needs of the state's salvation, are entitled to a greater share in administering and determining justice, within the light of its common good, than those who have less, or no such understanding or concern for it, such as selfish despots and political factions, as well as uneducated artisans and freedmen, women and children, slaves, etc.  More than this, Aristotle argues that rational discourse itself is what the state's Common Good relies upon, identifying those who lack it, as "slaves by nature," while those who excel in it are nearly divine,Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics . The Internet Classics Archive; available at http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.html. I.2.1094b7–10 (last accessed 30 Jan 2011). possessing in themselves the whole purpose for which states exist, namely, the perfectly complete good/blessed life.  In his Nicomachean Ethics then, Aristotle ties up the Common Good of the state, with that of friendship, implying by this, that friendly, rational discourse is the primary activity by which citizens and rulers bring about the Common Good, both amongst themselves, and so far as it involves their inferior ...
