    }} File:Concert Band.jpg|thumb|300px|A full concert band—Indiana Wind Symphony in concert, 2014  A "concert band", also called a "wind band", "wind ensemble", "wind symphony", "wind orchestra", "symphonic band",  the "symphonic winds", or "symphonic wind ensemble", is a performing ensemble consisting of members of the woodwind instrument|woodwind, brass instrument|brass, and percussion instrument|percussion families of instruments, and occasionally including the harp, double bass, or bass guitar. On rare occasions, additional, non-traditional instruments may be added to such ensembles such as piano, synthesizer, or electric guitar. Concert band music generally includes original wind instrument|wind compositions, concert marches, transcriptions of orchestral arrangements, light music, and pop music|popular music. Though the concert band does have similar instrumentation to the marching band, a marching band's main purpose is to perform while marching. In contrast, a concert band strictly performs as a concert|stationary ensemble. ==Origins== The origins of concert band can be traced back to the French Revolution, in which large bands would often gather for patriotic festivals and celebrations. These bands would play popular music that would immediately captivate the public's attention. Throughout the French Revolution, however, serious composers were often not interested in composing music for bands; this was due in large part to the instrumentation. Concert bands were (and still are not) standardized in their required type and number of instruments, making it nearly impossible to write the correct number of parts for the correct types of instruments. The quality of instruments also impacted composers' unwillingness to compose music for concert band. Wind instruments at this time were often difficult to play in tune and had difficulty in switching pitch and rhythm fast enough. This in turn influenced bands to stick with pieces that were transposed from orchestral movements and arrangements, something that has carried into modern day. During the 19th century, large ensembles of wind and percussion instruments in the Early British popular music|British and Music of the United States|American traditions existed mainly in the form of the military band for ceremonial and festive occasions, and the works performed consisted mostly of March (music)|marches. The only time wind bands were used in a concert setting comparable to that of a symphony orchestra was when transcriptions of orchestral or operatic pieces were arranged and performed, as there were comparatively few original concert works for a large wind ensemble. It wasn't until the early 20th century that composers began writing works for concert band. Concert band composers of this time were frustrated at the lack of quality music for bands, and as such, began writing and performing pieces to remedy this. One of the first and most important concert band arrangements, First Suite in E-flat for Military Band|First Suite for Band by Gustav Holst was written in 1909. Other composers of this time period include Ralph Vaughn Williams, Richard Wagner, and Aaron Copland.  Before the 1950s, wind ensembles included various combinations of instruments. The modern "standard" instrumentation of the wind ensemble was more or less established by Frederick Fennell at Eastman School of Music as the Eastman Wind Ensemble in 1952 after the model of the orchestra: a pool of players from which a composer can select in order to create different sonorities. According to Fennell, the wind ensemble was not revolutionary, but developed naturally out of the music. ==Bands today==   A "military band" is a group of personnel that performs musical duties for military functions, usually for the armed forces. A typical military band consists mostly of wind and percussion instruments. The conducting|conductor of a band commonly bears the title of Bandmaster or Director of Music. Ottoman military bands are thought to be the oldest variety of military marching band in the world, dating from the 13th century. Military bands were originally used to control troops on the battlefield, using instruments such as Military drums|drums, bugles, and Fife (instrument)|fifes among others. As communication systems during war became more advanced, the use of instruments on the battlefield as signaling devices fell out of use. From then on, military bands would fulfill a ceremonial role, entertaining troops and playing for the community. As its role shifted so too did its instrumentation. A wider range of instruments was employed to play transcriptions of orchestral works, the bulk of the early wind band repertoire. These military bands evolved into the modern Drum and bugle corps (modern)|drum and bugle corps and helped to spread the idea of a concert band. A modern military will often have multiple types of bands (e.g. the United States Marine Corps has both a United States Marine Drum and Bugle Corps|drum and bugle corps and United States Marine Band|wind ensemble).File:DSC 8763 (7084102945).jpg|thumb|right|350px|A military band—United States Army Band|The United States Army Band  Professional concert bands not associated with the military appear across the globe, particularly in developed countries. However, most do not offer full-time positions. The competition to make it into one of these concert bands is incredibly high and the ratio of performers to entrants is narrowly small. Examples of professional non-military concert bands include:<!--WIKIPEDIA ARTICLES ONLY! Do not list a band unless it has a Wikipedia article already--> * Dallas Wind Symphony, led by Jerry Junkin * Tokyo Kosei Wind Orchestra, led for many years by Frederick Fennell, and currently conducted by Takeshi Ooi * Osaka Shion Wind Orchestra  * Royal Hawaiian Band, created by royal decree in 1836 by King Kamehameha III   A community band is a concert band or brass band ensemble composed of volunteer (non-paid) amateur musicians in a particular geographic area. It may be sponsored by the local (municipal) government or self-supporting. These groups rehearse regularly and perform at least once a year. Some bands are also marching bands, participating in parades and other outdoor events. Although they are volunteer musical organizations, community bands may employ an artistic director (conducting|conductor) or various operational staff. The rise of the community band can partially be attributed to industrialization. As the instruments became easier to manufacture, their availability greatly increased. This meant that many amateurs could now form a town band, their arrangements typically consisting of patriotic tunes, marches, and popular music. The American Civil War marked a turning point in the American community band where many military musicians, either stemming from amateur or professional backgrounds, sought to create their own community band after the war's conclusion. The large number of bands created during this era led to a "Golden Age of Bands", spearheaded by conductors such as John Philip Sousa and Patrick Gilmore. The new forms of twentieth-century entertainment, namely the radio and phonograph, led to decline in community bands. This led to instrument manufacturers, who previously had marketed to the community bands, to focus on schools. The expansion of school music programs would eventually help restore interest in the community band as graduates sought to play in a band together again.  Notable community bands include:<!--WIKIPEDIA ARTICLES ONLY! Do not list a band unless it has a Wikipedia article already--> "U.S.A." * The American Band, Providence, Rhode Island, conducted by Brian Cardany * Allentown Band, the oldest American civilian band, Allentown, Pennsylvania, conducted by Ronald Demkee * Brooklyn Wind Symphony, Brooklyn, NY, conducted by Jeff W. Ball * Lesbian & Gay Big Apple Corps, New York, New York, conducted by Kelly Watkins * Northshore Concert Band, Evanston, Illinois, conducted by Mallory Thompson * Salt Lake Symphonic Winds, Salt Lake City, Utah, conducted by Thomas P. Rohrer * The TriBattery Pops Tom Goodkind Conductor|The TriBattery Pops, New York, NY, conducted by Tom Goodkind * East Winds Symphonic Band, Pittsburgh, PA, conducted by Susan Sands "United Kingdom" * Birmingham Symphonic Winds, conducted by Keith Allen * Newark and Sherwood Concert Band, Newark, Nottinghamshire, conducted by Colum J O'Shea * North Cheshire Wind Orchestra, Warrington, Cheshire, conducted by Catherine Tackley * Nottingham Concert Band, conducted by Robert Parker * National Youth Wind Orchestra of Great Britain, various conductors "Canada" * Pacific Symphonic Wind Ensemble, Vancouver. David Branter, Resident Conductor and Acting Music Director "Australia" * North West Wind Ensemble, Sydney, James Brice, Musical Director * Sydney Wind Symphony, Mark Brown, Musical Director * Queensland Wind Orchestra, conducted by David Law * Weston Winds, conducted by Peter Shaw "Norway" * Dragefjellets Musikkorps (Bergen Symphonic Band) * Sandvikens Ungdomskorps, Bergen, conducted by Tormod Flaten and Bjørn Breistein "Portugal" * União Filarmónica do Troviscal, Troviscal—Aveiro, conducted by André Granjo "Finland" * Tikkurilan Soittokunta, Vantaa, conducted by Kimmo Nurmi   A school band is a group of student musicians who rehearse and perform instrumental music together. A school band is usually under the direction of one or more conducting|conductors (band directors). A school band consists of woodwind instruments, brass instruments and Percussion instrument|percussion instruments, although upper level bands may also have string basses or bass guitar. In many traditional U.S. high schools, there are multiple band levels, distinguished by skill level or other factors. In such schools, an audition may be required to advance to further band levels, while the common level would be open to anyone. For example, in many U.S. high schools, "Concert Band" refers to the introductory level band, "Symphonic Band" is the title for the intermediate level band, and "Wind Ensemble" is the title for the advanced level band. ==Instrumentation== File:1911 Sousa Band.jpg|thumb|The early instrumentation of a large concert band (including violin soloist Nicoline Zedeler) is shown by the John Philip Sousa|John Philip Sousa Band during their 1911 world tour. Instrumentation for the wind band is not completely standardized; composers will frequently add or omit parts. Instruments and parts in parentheses are less common but still often used; due to the fact that some bands are missing these instruments, important lines for these instruments are often cued into other parts. Instrumentation differs depending on the type of ensemble. Middle school and high school bands frequently have more limited instrumentation and fewer parts (for example, no double reeds, or only two horn parts instead of four). This is both to limit the difficulty for inexperienced players and because schools frequently do not have access to the less common instruments. The standard concert band will have several players on each part depending on available personnel and the preference of conducting|the conductor. A concert band can theoretically have as many as 200 members from a set of only  ...
