  File:Chester Cathedral Consistory court.jpg|thumb|right|upright=1.15|One of the oldest complete ecclesiastical courtrooms in England is the consistory court in Chester Cathedral. A "consistory court" is a type of ecclesiastical court, especially within the Church of England where they were originally established pursuant to a charter of King William I of England|William the Conqueror, and still exist today, although since about the middle of the 19th century consistory courts have lost much of their subject-matter jurisdiction.  Each diocese in the Church of England has a consistory court (called in the Diocese of Canterbury the "Commissary Court"). == History of consistory courts in England == Consistory courts have been in existence in England since shortly after the Norman conquest and their jurisdiction and operation was essentially unaffected by the English reformations. Originally, the jurisdiction of consistory courts was very wide indeed and covered such matters as defamation, probate, and matrimonial causes as well as a general jurisdiction over both clergy and laity in relation to matters relating to church discipline and to morality more generally and to the use and control of consecrated church property within the diocese. The judge of the consistory court, appointed by the bishop, was the bishop's official principal and vicar-general of the diocese and became known in his judicial capacity by the title "Chancellor (ecclesiastical)|chancellor". Appeals lay from the consistory court to the provincial court of the archbishop. In the province of Canterbury, the archbishop's court was known as the Court of Arches and was presided over by the archbishop's official principal, known as the dean of the Arches.  In the province of York, appeals lay to the Chancery Court of York presided over by the archbishop of York's official principal, the auditor.  Until 1532 further appeal lay to Rome; thereafter further appeal was to the Crown. By the end of the eighteenth century, the exercise of jurisdiction over the laity in moral matters had fallen into desuetude. But there was no reform of the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts until the middle of the nineteenth century.  In 1855 the defamation jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical court was brought to an endEcclesiastical Courts Act 1855, sec. 1 (repealed) and in 1857 the probate jurisdiction was transferred to the newly created Court of ProbateCourt of Probate Act 1857, sec. 3–4 (repealed) and the matrimonial jurisdiction to the newly-created Divorce Court.Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, sec. 2–4 (repealed)  Both of these new courts were temporal rather than ecclesiastical courts; but their procedure continued (as it continues to this day) to reflect the ecclesiastical origins of the jurisdiction with, for example, matrimonial proceedings being by way of petition and the "citation" of parties in probate proceedings.  A major part of the jurisdiction left to the ecclesiastical courts was that which concerned the control of consecrated ecclesiastical property – essentially churches and their churchyards and certain other consecrated places such as municipal burial grounds.  The other major aspect of their jurisdiction which remained was their criminal jurisdiction in relation to the clergy – i.e. their jurisdiction to deal with allegations of ecclesiastical offences against the clergy (for example for immoral conduct, neglect of duty or in relation to doctrinal or ceremonial matters). Their corrective jurisdiction over clergy was abrogated by the Church Discipline Act 1840. However, by the Clergy Discipline Act 1892, a clergyman may be prosecuted and tried in a consistory court for immoral acts or conduct. Under this act, either party may appeal to a secular court or the monarch in Council. Following a report in 1954 from the Archbishops’ Commission on Ecclesiastical Courts, the ecclesiastical courts were put on a statutory footing by the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963.  The jurisdiction of the consistory courts was not much altered by the 1963 Measure save that criminal jurisdiction over the clergy where the case involved a question of doctrine, ritual or ceremonial was transferred to a new court called the Court of Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved (which continues to have that role). A further reform took place more recently when the Clergy Discipline Measure 2003 transferred the criminal jurisdiction over the clergy (other than in relation to matters of doctrine, ritual or ceremonial) to new "bishop's tribunals" with modern tribunal procedure and a revised scheme of statutory penalties. ==Jurisdiction today==  Consistory courts are the King's courts with the ultimate appellate authority being either His Majesty in Council or a Commission of Review directed by His Majesty under the Great Seal.Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 8–11 They are superior courts in the sense that it need not appear in any proceedings or judgements of a consistory courts that the court was acting within its jurisdiction; but they are inferior courts in the sense that they can be stopped from exceeding their jurisdiction by a prohibiting order granted on judicial review."R v Chancellor of St Edmundsbury and Ipswich Diocese, ex p White"  1 KB 195 A consistory court has the same powers as the High Court of Justice|High Court in relation to the attendance and examination of witnesses and the production and inspection of documents.Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 81(1) If any person does or omits to do anything in connection with proceedings before, or with an order made by, a consistory court that constitutes contempt of the consistory court, that person is liable to be punished by the High Court as if that person had been guilty of contempt of the High Court.Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 81(2)-(4)  The consistory court of a diocese has jurisdictionEcclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 6 to hear and determine:  * proceedings for obtaining a faculty to authorise an act relating to land in the diocese, or to something on, in or otherwise appertaining to land there, for which a faculty is required;  * proceedings for an order under section 21 of the Care of Churches and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1991 (delivery of article to place of safety);  * proceedings for obtaining a faculty under section 4 of the Faculty Jurisdiction Measure 1964 (sale of books in parochial library);  * proceedings for an injunction or a restoration order under section 13 of the Care of Churches and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1991;  * proceedings under section 68(7) or (12) of the Mission and Pastoral Measure 2011 (enforcement or interpretation of leases);  * proceedings under section 71(9) of that measure (compensation for loss of burial rights);  * proceedings upon a "jus patronatus" }} awarded by the bishop of the diocese;  * any other proceedings which, immediately before the passing of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 on 31 July 1963, the court had power to determine (except proceedings the jurisdiction for which was expressly abolished by that measure).  The exercise of the faculty jurisdiction forms the very great majority of the work of the consistory courts today – the rest of the statutory jurisdiction being largely concerned with rather technical matters of ecclesiastical law and only rarely invoked. As a general rule, land and buildings become subject to the jurisdiction of the consistory court by virtue of being consecrated by the bishop of the diocese.  In the case of more recently built churches there will be a formal record of consecration; in the case of ancient churches, there is a legal presumption that they have been consecrated.  All parish churches, and certain other buildings and land even though not consecrated, are subject to the faculty jurisdiction.Care of Churches and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction 1991, sec. 11  The consecrated parts of municipal cemeteries are subject to the faculty jurisdiction."In re Welford Road Cemetery, Leicester"  Fam 15"In re Fairmile Cemetery, Lower Assendon"  3 WLR 1284 A faculty is required for any material alteration in such a church or its churchyard. A faculty is required for the disturbance or removal of human remains that have been buried in consecrated land; it is a criminal offence to remove a body from consecrated land without the authority of a faculty.Burial Act 1857, sec. 25 The jurisdiction also extends to all the goods appertaining to such a church, as well as to its fabric and any fittings annexed to the realty, and also to the churchyard.Care of Churches and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1991, sec. 11(1) It is because of the existence of the faculty jurisdiction that the "ecclesiastical exemption" from listed building control}} is provided for in heritage protection legislation, Parliament having taken the view that there was already in place, in relation to the buildings and land of the Church of England that were in ecclesiastical use, a satisfactory legal regime controlling their use and alteration.  (The benefit of the exemption is extended under the current heritage protection legislation to the buildings of other denominations who have satisfied the Secretary of State that they have established adequate regimes for preserving the historic and architectural character of their listed ecclesiastical buildings.)  Much of the work of the consistory courts today involves applying principles of ecclesiastical law to applications ("petitions") for faculties to make alterations to listed church buildings.  Those legal principles have been developed in recent years expressly to take account of the desirability of preserving the historic and architectural character of the church's listed buildings but in such a way that the needs&nbsp;– particularly those that relate to the mission of the church&nbsp;– are fully taken into account in determining faculty petitions that seek the making of changes to listed churches.  The criteria to be adopted by consistory courts when considering proposals for the alteration of churches which are listed buildings under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 are set out in "Re St Alkmund, Duffield"  Fam 158, a decision of the Arches Court of Canterbury. == Judge == Each Consistory court is presided over by a single judge who is styled the "Chancellor (ecclesiastical)|Chancellor of the Diocese" (or in Canterbury the "Commissary-General"). The chancellor is appointed by the bishop of the diocese by letters patent following consultation with the Lord Chancellor and the Dean of the arches|Dean of the Arches and Auditor. Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the diocese, both contentious and voluntary, is committed to the Chancellor under two separate offices, those of "official principal" and "vicar-general": the distinction between the two offices is that the official principal usually exercises contentious jurisdiction and the vicar-general voluntary jurisdiction. A person is eligible for appointment as chancellor only if the person holds or has held high judicial office, holds or has held the office of circuit judge, or has the qualifications required for holding the office of circuit judge.Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 2 A lay person must be a communicant of the Church of England to be eligible.  The chancellor takes the judicial oath, the oath of allegiance and, if a lay person, makes the declaration of assent|Declaration of Assent required by Canon G 2 of the Canons of the Church of England.  The chancellor may be removed by the bishop only if the Upper House of the Convocation of the province resolves that he is incapable of acting or unfit to act. Chancellors are addressed on the bench as "Worshipful Sir" or "Sir" and are styled "The Worshipful". When sitting, chancellors wear the same black silk gown that was formerly worn by judges in the Chancery Division of the High Court and by certain other judges, with a short wig, collar and bands. On ceremonial occasions chancellors wear a full-bottomed wig and the silk gown is worn over a court coat, court waistcoat with lace jabot and knee breaches, silk stockings and patent leather pumps with buckles. The consistory court itself is styled "this venerable court". Most have a Ceremonial mace|mace, carried by the apparitor, who is usually a member of the staff of the diocesan registry and who was historically the official who served the processes of the court and caused defendants to appear by summons. There may also be a deputy chancellor who may exercise the court's jurisdiction in the same way as the chancellor.  In order to be appointed a deputy chancellor a person must have the qualifications required to be appointed a chancellor.Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963, sec. 4 ==Procedure== The procedure to be followed by the court and by parties in faculty proceedings are set out i ...
