  () |rels=traditional tribal religion |langs=English language|English, Cowlitz language|Cowlitz, Sahaptin language|Sahaptin |related=Chehalis people|Chehalis, Quinault people|Quinault "Ethnologue." Retrieved 29 Sept 2013.}} The term "Cowlitz people" covers two culturally and linguistically distinct indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest; the  "Lower Cowlitz" or "Cowlitz proper", and the "Upper Cowlitz / Cowlitz Klickitat" or "Taitnapam." Lower Cowlitz refers to a southwestern Coast Salish people, which today are enrolled in the federally recognized tribes: Cowlitz Indian Tribe, Quinault Indian Nation, "Quinault Indian Nation." Retrieved 24 Sept 2013. and Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation. The Upper Cowlitz or Taitnapam, is a Sahaptin|Northwest Sahaptin speaking people, part of the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation. Their traditional homelands are in western Washington (state)|Washington state in the United States. == Cowlitz tribal groups or bands == There is an ongoing dispute over the Cowlitz people, their history, territory, ancestry, ethnicity, and language; which is important for land claims and treaty negotiations with the U.S. government by Cowlitz descendants. Some scholars believe that they were originally divided into four multi-linguistic tribal bands and generally spoke two different dialects of Salish; the common language of Western Washington and British Columbia native peoples, and one Sahaptin dialect. However, not every band understood the specific dialect of another,  and they bridged the language barrier with an intertribal trade language called Chinook Jargon."History of the Cowlitz Indian Tribe," by Roy I. Wilson, and Dr. Verne F. Ray, Indian Claims Conference, 1966 and 1974 Today, the majority is of the opinion that the tribal term "Cowlitz" is a regional collective designation applied by the Europeans to ethnically and linguistic different groups or bands of Indian peoples of the entire Cowlitz River Basin.Eugene Hunn: Anthropological Study of Yakama Tribe: Traditional Resource Harvest Sites West of the Crest of the Cascades Mountains in Washington State and below the Cascades of the Columbia River These are the four (or two) Cowlitz tribal groups or bands: * the "Lower Cowlitz" or "Cowlitz proper" ("The People Who Seek Their Medicine Spirit", occupied 30 villages along the Cowlitz River|Lower Cowlitz River, other villages along the Toutle River; today the majority are enrolled within the Cowlitz Indian Tribe, some are part of Quinault Indian Nation, and Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation) * the "Upper Cowlitz", sometimes called "Stick Indians", today identified as Sahaptin-speaking "Taidnapam" (″People of the Tieton River″, occupied and controlled fourteen villages along the Upper Cowlitz River (shch'il) above Morton and Mossyrock, other villages along the Cispus River (shíshpash), and the Tilton River (lalálx) and had frequent contact with their Yakama|Upper and Lower Yakama and Klickitat people|Klickitat kin who lived on the east side of the Cascade Range and spoke Sahaptin. They apparently intermarried with Salish-speaking Lower Cowlitz communities downriver and traveled freely as far as the mouth of the Cowlitz River but were not originally Salish-speaking people. Their own name "Taitnapam" indicates that they originally came from east of the Cascades - along the Tieton River (in Yakama: Táitin) hence territory of the "Nahchísh-ħlama", a Yakama/Lower Yakama band along the Naches River and had strong linguistic and family ties to that band and the Klikatat / Klickitat; today as "Yakima Cowlitz" or "Cowlitz Klickitat Band" part of the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation).The other version is: Intermarriage among the tribes was common. Yakama and Klickitat tribes on the eastern side of the Cascades spoke Sahaptin. Over time a new dialect of Sahaptin came into common use by the Upper Cowlitz tribe called Taidnapum — which eventually came into wide use by the Lewis River Cowlitz as well.  * the "Lewis River Cowlitz", sometimes called "Lewis River Chinook", today considered to be regional group of "Taidnapam" (lived along Lewis River (Washington)|Upper Lewis River and uppermost Nisqually River as neighbors to their Sahaptin kin the Yakama|Mishalpam (Mical-ɫa’ma) (″Eatonville, Washington|Eatonville people″, lit. ″Mashel River people″) and Klickitat; today as "Lewis River Klickitat Band" part of the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation)  * the "Mountain Cowlitz" or "Kwalhiokwa Cowlitz" (lived between the Chehalis River (Washington)|Upper Chehalis River in the north and in the Willapa Hills to the south, intermarried with Salish-speaking Chehalis people|Upper Chehalis (Kwaiailk) and the now extinct Northern Athabaskan languages|Northern Athapaskan-speaking Willapa people|Willapa (Kwalhioqua); today part of the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation) ==Language== Comparably with the dispute over who the "original" Cowlitz people were, there is debate over the "original" Linguistics|language of the Cowlitz tribes. The commonly called Cowlitz language or "Sƛ̕púlmš" is placed closer to the Upper Chehalis language, closer than Lower Chehalis itself is placed to Upper Chehalis, and belongs to the Tsamosan (Olympic) branch of the Coast Salish languages|Coast Salish family of the Salishan languages, and was spoken by the "Lower Cowlitz / Cowlitz proper". There is a dispute over the original language of the "Upper Cowlitz" and "Lewis River Cowlitz" bands. The question concerns whether they had adopted the Sahaptin language from east of the Cascade Range|Cascade Mountains, ceased to use their original, heritage language, and developed a separate "Taitnapam / Upper Cowlitz / Lewis River dialect" of Sahaptin, or whether they were Sahaptin-speaking people from east of the Cascade Range who came to occupy the Upper Cowlitz River Basin by conquest and intermarriage. Modeste Demers reported that the Cowlitz peoples were fluent in Chinook Jargon.François N. Blanchet|Blanchet, François N.  Portland: 1878. p. 59. ==Government== The Cowlitz Indian Tribe was federally recognized on February 14, 2000, and their acknowledgement was reaffirmed in 2002.  They are now recognized officially by the Federal government of the United States|United States federal government and have an establishing federally recognized tribal lands (on a Indian reservation|reservation) in Ridgefield, Washington. The tribal offices are in Longview, Washington. The Cowlitz political system evolved: <blockquote>from a strong system of chiefs to an elective presidential system in the early 20th century; and a constitutional elective Tribal Council system after 1950. Chief How-How (c. 1815), Chief Kiscox (c. 1850), Chief Umtux (c. 1850), Chief Scanewa (c. 1855), Chief Richard Scanewa (c. 1860), and Chief Antoine Stockum  (1878) led the Cowlitz in the 19th century. Twentieth-century figures include Chief Baptiste Kiona (1912), President Dan Plamondon (1921), President John Ike Kinswa (1922), Chairman John B. Sareault (c. 1925), Chairman Jas. E. Sareault (c. 1930), Chairman Manual L. Forrest (1950), Chairman Joseph Cloquet (1959), Chairman Clifford Wilson (1961), Chairman Roy Wilson (1974), Chairman John Barnett, Chairman Bill Iyall (1993), Chairman Phil Harju (2020), Chairman David Barnett (2021), and Chairman Patty Kinswa-Gaiser (2022). </blockquote> The current Cowlitz Tribe General Council Chair is Patty Kinswa-Gaiser. ==Culture== The Cowlitz Indian Tribe|Cowlitz tribe was unique among other tribes of Western Washington and Oregon in that they did not typically have access to saltwater or the coast and the Columbia River's resources were of little use to the tribe. Salmon was important to their diet, but not as much as compared to other tribes; as they were accomplished hunters who relied on harvesting roots as diet supplements, and utilizing horses for multiple purposes. The Cowlitz Indian Tribe|Cowlitz tribe completed a yearly cycle where they inhabited locations during certain seasons and harvested seasonal crops, in preparation for cold winter months. The season started in spring, when the Cowlitzes left their cedar houses along the river and streams by traveling via canoe and horseback to harvest camas bulbs, roots, barks, and grasses to make mats, fishnets, and basketry. Followed by the arrival of summer, where they would move into the higher country to pick and harvest seasonal berries. Lastly, followed by the return to fall, where the Cowlitzes would return to their cedar homes along the river to harvest Salmon, for the upcoming season. Generally, hunting and fishing were practiced all year round, but only roots and fruits had to be harvested seasonally. The Cowlitz Indian Tribe|Cowlitz, like the Chinookan peoples|Chinookian tribes, practiced the custom of flattening the head; signifying the mark of freedom and an intellect similar to that of round-head Indian tribes. Indian Mothers typically practice head flattening on newborn infants until they reach eight to twelve months old; when the head has lost its original shape. The process is completed by placing a child onto a wooden board, usually covered with moss or loose fibers of cedar bark, then placing a pad between a piece of smooth bark, strapped on through the holes with leather bands, creating great pressure on the forehead. The result creates a wedge in between the skull, with the front of the skull flat and the skull risen at the crown. These practices were not seen as harmful to the mothers and their children; in fact, some children would cry until they were placed back into the head flattening device. The Cowlitz produced fully imbricated, coiled baskets with strong geometric designs. These were made of bear grass, cedar root, horsetail root, and cedar bark and were used to gather berries and fruits. The pigments were made from very bright fruits and vegetables like beets or blackberries. Such baskets were often repaired and kept through many generations. Today, the Cowlitz continue to practice their culture. ==History== The Cowlitz tribe was historically based along the Cowlitz River|Cowlitz and Lewis River (Washington)|Lewis Rivers, as well as having a strong presence at Fort Vancouver. The first white man known to have contacted the Cowlitz was French-Canadian Simon Plamondon of Quebec. Plamondon was hired as a fur trapper for Fort Astoria at the age of sixteen. In 1818 while making his first trip up the Cowlitz, Simon was captured by Chief Scanewea, of the Lower Cowlitz Indian Tribe|Cowlitz. He was then asked to stay with Scanewa's tribe and to prove his loyalties through the exchange of goods for furs. Once he had gained the trust of the tribe, he was rewarded with the marriage of Chief Scanewea's daughter, Thas-e-muth. When Chief Scanewea passed, Plamondon inherited most of his land and settled down with his wife on the Cowlitz Prairie where they bore four children: Sophie, Simon, Jr., Theresa, and Marianne. It is rumored that Plamondon was married many different times and very young; fathering nearly 100 descendants.}} Plamondon was employed with the Hudson's Bay Company until 1837 and in 1838 oversaw the building of Fort Cowlitz|Cowlitz Farm under the Pugets Sound Agricultural Company|Puget Sound Agricultural Company, the Hudson's Bay Company agricultural subsidiary. The first European who attempted to convert the Cowlitz to Christianity was Herbert Beaver, an Anglican, who settled with his wife at Fort Vancouver in 1836. The couple set their sights on the Cowlitz tribe, only 50 miles southeast of Fort Vancouver, but growing tensions with John McLoughlin, the head at Fort Vancouver, prevented the couple from having any influence over the tribe; implementing their practices was with great difficulty. When the intermittent fever broke out, Beaver was responsible for vaccinating nearly 120 Lewis River Cowlitzes. After conflicts arose with McLoughlin, Beaver and his wife headed home to London] ...
