 DPI}}  Image:PrinterDots.jpg|right|frame|A close-up of the dots produced by an inkjet printer at draft quality. Actual size is approximately . Individual coloured droplets of ink are visible; this sample is about 150 DPI. "Dots per inch" ("DPI", or "dpi"The acronym appears in sources as either "DPI" or lowercase "dpi". See:   (PDF). Xerox.com. September 2012.) is a measure of spatial printing, video or image scanner dot density, in particular the number of individual dots that can be placed in a line within the span of . Similarly, "dots per centimetre" ("d/cm" or "dpcm") refers to the number of individual dots that can be placed within a line of . == DPI measurement in printing == File:Microscope ink 05.jpg|thumb|right|Dots on printed paper. DPI is used to describe the resolution number of dots per inch in a digital print and the printing resolution of a hard copy print dot gain, which is the increase in the size of the halftone dots during printing. This is caused by the spreading of ink on the surface of the media. Up to a point, computer printer|printers with higher DPI produce clearer and more detailed output. A printer does not necessarily have a single DPI measurement; it is dependent on print mode, which is usually influenced by driver settings. The range of DPI supported by a printer is most dependent on the print head technology it uses. A dot matrix printer, for example, applies ink via tiny rods striking an ink ribbon, and has a relatively low resolution, typically in the range of . An inkjet printer sprays ink through tiny nozzles, and is typically capable of 300–720 DPI. A laser printer applies toner through a controlled electrostatic charge, and may be in the range of 600 to 2,400&nbsp;DPI. The DPI measurement of a printer often needs to be considerably higher than the pixels per inch (PPI) measurement of a video display in order to produce similar-quality output. This is due to the limited range of colours for each dot typically available on a printer. At each dot position, the simplest type of color printer can either print no dot, or print a dot consisting of a fixed volume of ink in each of four color channels (typically CMYK with cyan, magenta, yellow and black ink) or 2<sup>4</sup> = 16 colours on laser, wax and most inkjet printers, of which only 14 or 15 (or as few as 8 or 9) may be actually discernible depending on the strength of the black component, the strategy used for overlaying and combining it with the other colours, and whether it is in "color" mode. Higher-end inkjet printers can offer 5, 6 or 7 ink colours giving 32, 64 or 128 possible tones per dot location (and again, it can be that not all combinations will produce a unique result). Contrast this to a standard sRGB monitor where each pixel produces 256 intensities of light in each of three channels (RGB). While some color printers can produce variable drop volumes at each dot position, and may use additional ink-color channels, the number of colours is still typically less than on a monitor. Most printers must therefore produce additional colours through a halftone or dithering process, and rely on their base resolution being high enough to "fool" the human observer's eye into perceiving a patch of a single smooth colour. The exception to this rule is dye-sublimation printers, which can apply a much more variable amount of dye—close to or exceeding the number of the 256 levels per channel available on a typical monitor—to each "pixel" on the page without dithering, but with other limitations: * lower spatial resolution (typically 200 to 300&nbsp;dpi), which can make text and lines look somewhat rough * lower output speed (a single page requiring three or four complete passes, one for each dye colour, each of which may take more than fifteen seconds—generally quicker, however, than most inkjet printers' "photo" modes) * a wasteful (and, for confidential documents, insecure) dye-film roll cartridge system * occasional color registration errors (mainly along the long axis of the page), which necessitate recalibrating the printer to account for slippage and drift in the paper feed system. These disadvantages mean that, despite their marked superiority in producing good photographic and non-linear diagrammatic output, dye-sublimation printers remain niche products, and thus other devices using higher resolution, lower color depth, and dither patterns remain the norm. This dithered printing process could require a region of four to six dots (measured across each side) in order to faithfully reproduce the color in a single pixel. An image that is 100 pixels wide may need to be 400 to 600 dots in width in the printed output; if a 100&nbsp;×&nbsp;100-pixel image is to be printed in a one-inch square, the printer must be capable of 400 to 600 dots per inch to reproduce the image. Fittingly, 600 dpi (sometimes 720) is now the typical output resolution of entry-level laser printers and some utility inkjet printers, with 1200–1440 and 2400–2880 being common "high" resolutions. This contrasts with the 300–360 (or 240) dpi of early models, and the approximate 200 dpi of dot-matrix printers and fax machines, which gave faxed and computer-printed documents—especially those that made heavy use of graphics or coloured block text—a characteristic "digitized" appearance, because of their coarse, obvious dither patterns, inaccurate colours, loss of clarity in photographs, and jagged ("aliased") edges on some text and line art. Image:DPI and PPI.png|right|frame|A 10 × 10-pixel computer display image usually requires many more than 10&nbsp;×&nbsp;10 printer dots to reproduce it accurately, due to the limited colours of ink available from the printer; here, a 60&nbsp;×&nbsp;60 grid is used, providing 36 times the original density, compensating for the printer's fewer colours. The whole blue pixels making up the sphere are reproduced by the printer using different overlaid combinations of cyan, magenta, and black ink, and the light aqua by cyan and yellow with some "white" (ink-free) print pixels within the actual image pixel. When viewed at a more normal distance, the primary coloured stippled dots appear to merge into a smoother, more richly coloured image.   In printing, DPI (dots per inch) refers to the output resolution of a printer or imagesetter, and PPI (pixels per inch) refers to the input resolution of a photograph or image. "DPI" refers to the physical dot density of an image when it is reproduced as a real physical entity, for example printed onto paper. A digitally stored image has no inherent physical dimensions, measured in inches or centimetres. Some digital file formats record a DPI value, or more commonly a PPI (pixels per inch) value, which is to be used when printing the image. This number lets the printer or software know the intended size of the image, or in the case of scanned images, the size of the original scanned object. For example, a bitmap image may measure 1,000 × 1,000 pixels, a resolution of 1 megapixels|megapixel. If it is labelled as 250&nbsp;PPI, that is an instruction to the Printer (computing)|printer to print it at a size of 4 × 4&nbsp;inches. Changing the PPI to 100 in an image editing program would tell the printer to print it at a size of 10 × 10&nbsp;inches.  However, changing the PPI value would not change the size of the image in pixels which would still be 1,000 × 1,000. An image may also be resampled to change the number of pixels and therefore the size or resolution of the image, but this is quite different from simply setting a new PPI for the file. For vector images, there is no equivalent of resampling an image when it is resized, and there is no PPI in the file because it is resolution independent (prints equally well at all sizes). However, there is still a target printing size. Some image formats, such as Photoshop format, can contain both bitmap and vector data in the same file. Adjusting the PPI in a Photoshop file will change the intended printing size of the bitmap portion of the data and also change the intended printing size of the vector data to match. This way the vector and bitmap data maintain a consistent size relationship when the target printing size is changed. Text stored as outline fonts in bitmap image formats is handled in the same way. Other formats, such as PDF, are primarily vector formats which can contain images, potentially at a mixture of resolutions.  In these formats the target PPI of the bitmaps is adjusted to match when the target print size of the file is changed.  This is the converse of how it works in a primarily bitmap format like Photoshop, but has exactly the same result of maintaining the relationship between the vector and bitmap portions of the data. ==Computer monitor DPI standards== Since the 1980s, Mac (computer)|Macs have set the default display "DPI" to 72 PPI, while the Microsoft Windows operating system has used a default of 96 PPI.   These default specifications arose out of the problems rendering standard fonts in the early display systems of the 1980s, including the IBM-based Color Graphics Adapter|CGA, Enhanced Graphics Adapter|EGA, VGA and 8514 displays as well as the Mac (computer)|Macintosh displays featured in the Macintosh 128K|128K computer and its successors. The choice of 72&nbsp;PPI by Macintosh for their displays arose from existing convention: the official 72 "points per inch" mirrored the 72 "pixels per inch" that appeared on their display screens.  (Point (typography)|Points are a physical unit of measure in typography, dating from the days of printing presses, where 1 point by the Point (typography)#Current DTP point system|modern definition is  of the international inch (25.4&nbsp;mm), which therefore makes 1 point approximately 0.0139&nbsp;in or 352.8&nbsp;µm). Thus, the 72 pixels per inch seen on the display had exactly the same physical dimensions as the 72 points per inch later seen on a printout, with 1&nbsp;pt in printed text equal to 1&nbsp;px on the display screen. As it is, the Macintosh 128K featured a screen measuring 512 pixels in width by 342 pixels in height, and this corresponded to the width of standard office paper (512&nbsp;px ÷ 72&nbsp;px/in ≈ 7.1&nbsp;in, with a 0.7&nbsp;in margin down each side when assuming Letter paper|&nbsp;in × 11&nbsp;in North American paper size; in the rest of the world, it is 210&nbsp;mm × 297&nbsp;mm – called ISO 216#Dimensions of A, B and C series|A4. B5 is 176&nbsp;mm × 250&nbsp;mm). A consequence of Apple's decision was that the widely used 10-point fonts from the typewriter era had to be allotted 10 display pixels in em (typography)|em height, and 5 display pixels in "x-height". This is technically described as 10 "pixels per em" ("PPEm"). This made 10-point fonts be rendered crudely and made them difficult to read on the display screen, particularly the lowercase characters. Furthermore, there was the consideration that computer screens are typically viewed (at a desk) at a distance 30% greater than printed materials, causing a mismatch between the perceived sizes seen on the computer screen and those on the printouts. Microsoft tried to solve both problems with a hack that has had long-term consequences for the understanding of what DPI and PPI mean. Microsoft began writing its software to treat the screen as though it provided a PPI characteristic that is  of what the screen actually displayed. Because most screens at the time provided around 72 PPI, Microsoft essentially wrote its software to assume that every screen provides 96 PPI (because 72 ×  = 96). The short-term gain of this trickery was twofold: * It would seem to the software that one-third more pixels were available for rendering an image, thereby allowing for bitmap fonts to be created with greater detail. * On every screen that actually provided 72 PPI, each graphical element (such as a character of text) would be rendered at a size one third larger than it "should" be, thereby allowing a person to sit a comfortable distance from the screen. However, larger graphical elements meant less screen space was available for programs to draw; indeed, although the default 720-pixel wide mode of a Hercules mono graphics adaptor (the one-time gold standard for high resolution PC graphics) – or a "tweaked" VGA adaptor – provided an apparent -inch page width at this resolution, the more common and colour-capable display adaptors of the time all provided a 640-pixel wide image in their high resolution modes, enough for a bare  inches at 100% zoom (and barely any greater visible page "height" – a maximum of 5 inches, versus ). Consequently, the default margins in Microsoft Word were set, "and still remain" at 1 full inch on all sides of the page, keeping the "text width" for standard size printer paper within visible limits; despite most computer monitors now being both larger and finer-pitched, and printer paper transports having become more sophisticated, the Mac-standard half-inch borders remain listed in Word 2010's page layout presets as the "narrow" option (versus the 1-inch default). * Without using supplemental, software-provided zoom levels, the 1:1 relationship between display and print size was (deliberately) lost; the availability of different-sized, user-adjustable monitors and display adaptors with varying output resolutions exacerbated this, as it was not possible to rely on a properly-adjusted "standard" monitor and adaptor having a known PPI. For example, a 12-inch Hercules monitor and adaptor with a thick bezel and a little underscan may offer 90 "physical" PPI, with the displayed image appearing nearly identical to hardcopy (assuming the H-scan density was properly adjusted to give square pixels) but a thin-bezel 14-inch VGA monitor adjusted to give a borderless display may be closer to 60, with the same bitmap image thus appearing 50% larger; yet, someone with an 8514 ("XGA&qu ...
