   }}  Ethics involves systematizing, defending, and recommending concepts of right and wrong behavior."Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy":  A central aspect of ethics is "the good life", the life worth living or life that is simply satisfying, which is held by many philosophers to be more important than traditional Morality|moral conduct.Singer, P. (1993) "Practical Ethics", 2nd edition (p.10), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Most religions have an ethics|ethical component, often derived from purported supernatural revelation or guidance. Some assert that religion is necessary to live ethically. Simon Blackburn states that there are those who "would say that we can only flourish under the umbrella of a strong social order, cemented by common adherence to a particular religious tradition". ==Buddhist ethics==  Ethics in Buddhism are traditionally based on the Enlightenment in Buddhism|enlightened perspective of the Buddha, or other enlightened beings who followed him. Moral instructions are included in Buddhist scriptures or handed down through tradition. Most scholars of Buddhist ethics thus rely on the examination of Buddhist scriptures, and the use of anthropological evidence from traditional Buddhist societies, to justify claims about the nature of Buddhist ethics.Damien Keown "The Nature of Buddhist Ethics" Macmillan 1992; Peter Harvey "An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics" Cambridge University Press 2000 According to traditional Buddhism, the foundation of Buddhist ethics for laypeople is the The Five Precepts|Pancasila: no killing, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, or intoxicants. In becoming a Buddhist, or affirming one's commitment to Buddhism, a layperson is encouraged to vow to abstain from these negative actions. Buddhist monks and nuns take hundreds more such vows (see vinaya). This approach avoids basing Buddhist ethics solely on faith in the Buddha's enlightenment or Buddhist tradition, and may allow more universal non-Buddhist access to the insights offered by Buddhist ethics. The Buddha provided some basic guidelines for acceptable behavior that are part of the Noble Eightfold Path. The initial percept is non-injury or non-violence to all living creatures from the lowest insect to humans. This precept defines a non-violent attitude toward every living thing. The Buddhist practice of this does not extend to the extremes exhibited by Jainism, but from both the Buddhist and Jain perspectives, non-violence suggests an intimate involvement with, and relationship to, all living things.Carl Olson, "The Different Paths of Buddhism" p.73 Theravada monk Bhikkhu Bodhi has observed:<blockquote>Buddhist ethics, as formulated in the five precepts, is sometimes charged with being entirely negative. ... t has to be pointed out that the five precepts, or even the longer codes of precepts promulgated by the Buddha, do not exhaust the full range of Buddhist ethics. The precepts are only the most rudimentary code of moral training, but the Buddha also proposes other ethical codes inculcating definite positive virtues. The Mangala Sutta, for example, commends reverence, humility, contentment, gratitude, patience, generosity, etc. Other discourses prescribe numerous family, social, and political duties establishing the well being of society. And behind all these duties lie the four attitudes called the "immeasurables" – loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity.Bodhi (1994). For other examples of Buddhist discourses that promote ethical behaviors among laity see, for instance, the Sigalovada Sutta (referred to as "the Vinaya of the householder" by Buddhaghosa) and the Dhammika Sutta.</blockquote> ==Christian ethics==    Christian ethics is a branch of Christian theology that defines Virtue#Christian tradition|virtuous behavior and Christian views on sin|wrong behavior from a Christian perspective. Systematic theology|Systematic theological study of Christian ethics is called "moral theology". Christian virtues are often divided into four cardinal virtues and three theological virtues. Christian ethics includes questions regarding Christian views on poverty and wealth|how the rich should act toward the poor, Women in Christianity|how women are to be treated, and the Christianity and violence|morality of war. Christian ethicists, like other ethicists, approach ethics from different frameworks and perspectives. The approach of virtue ethics has also become popular in recent decades, largely due to the work of Alasdair MacIntyre and Stanley Hauerwas.https://www.academia.edu/539377/A_Brief_Look_at_MacIntyres_Virtue_Ethics_and_Theological_Application  There are several different schema of vice and virtue. Thomas Aquinas|Aquinas adopted the four cardinal virtues of Aristotle (justice, courage, temperance and prudence), and added to them the Christian virtues of faith, hope and charity (). Other schema include the Seven Deadly Sins and the Seven virtues. ==Confucian ethics==  Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism emphasize the maintenance and propriety of relationships as the most important consideration in ethics. To be ethical is to do what one's relationships require. Notably, though, what you owe to another person is inversely proportional to their distance from you. In other words, you owe your parents everything, but you are not in any way obligated towards strangers. This can be seen as a recognition of the fact that it is impossible to love the entire world equally and simultaneously. This is called relational ethics, or situational ethics. The Confucian system differs very strongly from Kantian ethics in that there are rarely laws or principles which can be said to be true absolutely or universally. This is not to say that there has never been any consideration given to universalist ethics. In fact, in Zhou Dynasty China, the Confucians' main opponents, the followers of Mozi argued for universal love (). The Confucian view eventually held sway, however, and continues to dominate many aspects of Chinese thought. Many have argued, for example, that Mao Zedong was more Confucian than Communist. Confucianism, especially of the type argued for by Mencius (), argued that the ideal ruler is the one who (as Confucius put it) "acts like the North Star, staying in place while the other stars orbit around it". In other words, the ideal ruler does not go out and force the people to become good, but instead leads by example. The ideal ruler fosters harmony rather than laws. Confucius stresses honesty above all. His concepts of lĭ (), Yi (Confucianism)|yì (), and Ren (Confucianism)|rén () can be seen as deeper expressions of honesty () and fidelity () to the ones to whom one owes one's existence (parents) and survival (one's neighbours, colleagues, inferiors in rank). He codified traditional practice and actually changed the meaning of the prior concepts that those words had meant. His model of the Confucian family and Confucian ruler dominated Chinese life into the early 20th century. This had ossified by then into an Imperial hierarchy of rigid property rights, hard to distinguish from any other dictatorship. Traditional ethics had been perverted by Legalism (Chinese philosophy)|legalism.   Buddhism, and specifically Mahayana Buddhism, brought a cohesive metaphysic to Chinese thought and a strong emphasis on universalism. Neo-Confucianism was largely a reaction to Buddhism's dominance in the Tang dynasty, and an attempt at developing a native Confucian metaphysical/analytical system. ==Germanic Neopagan ethics== Germanic Neopaganism|Germanic Neopagans, including followers of both Asatru and Theodism, try to emulate the ethical values of the ancient Germanic peoples (Norsemen|Norse or Anglo-Saxon). ==Hindu ethics ==  File:Non violence sculpture by carl fredrik reutersward malmo sweden.jpg|thumb|Ahimsa – non-violence in action, words and thoughts – is considered the highest ethical value and virtue in Hinduism.Stephen H. Phillips & other authors (2008), in Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace, & Conflict (Second Edition), , Elsevier Science, Pages 1347–1356, 701-849, 1867 Above: non-violence sculpture by Carl Fredrik Reutersward in Malmo, Sweden. Ethics is called Nitisastra (Sanskrit: नीतिशास्त्र) Sanskrit English Dictionary in ancient texts of Hinduism.Alban G. Widgery (1930), The Principles of Hindu Ethics, International Journal of Ethics, Vol. 40, No. 2 (Jan., 1930), pp. 232-245 Ethics and virtue are a much debatedRoderick Hindery (2004), Comparative Ethics in Hindu and Buddhist Traditions, ; pages 268-72; *Quote: "(In Hinduism), srutis did not pretend to deal with all situations or irregularities in the moral life, leaving these matters to human reasons (Mbh Xii.109); Accordingly, that again which is virtue may, according to time and place, be sin (...); Under certain conditions, acts that are apparently evil (such as violence) can be permitted if they produce consequences that are good (protection of children and women in self defense when the society is attacked in war) *Quote: "(The Hindu scripture) notes the interrelationship of several virtues, consequentially. Anger springs from covetousness; (the vice of) envy disappears in consequence of (the virtues) of compassion and knowledge of self (Mbh Xii.163); and an evolving concept in ancient scriptures of Hinduism.Crawford, S. Cromwell (1982), The evolution of Hindu ethical ideals, Asian Studies Program, University of Hawaii PressBecker and Becker (2001), Encyclopedia of Ethics, , 2nd Edition, Routledge, pages 845-848 Virtue, right conduct, ethics and morality are part of the complex concept Hindus call Dharma – everything that is essential for people, the world and nature to exist and prosper together, in harmony.Steven Rosen (2006), Essential Hinduism, Praeger, , page 31-45 As Pandurang Vaman Kane|P.V. Kane, the author of the History of Dharmaśāstra|History of Dharmasastra said, the term "Dharma" does not have a synonym in English language. While it is often interpreted as meaning "duty", it can mean justice, right, moral, good, and much more. Ethics are explained in Hindu philosophy as something that cannot be imposed, but something that is realized and voluntarily lived up to by each individual. For example, Apastamba explained it thus: "virtue and vice do not go about saying – here we are!; neither the Gods, Gandharvas, nor ancestors can convince us – this is right, this is wrong; virtue is an elusive concept, it demands careful and sustained reflection by every man and woman before it can become part of one's life.Phillip Wagoner, see Foreword, in Srinivasan, Dharma: Hindu Approach to a Purposeful Life, ; * Also see: Apastamba, Dharma Sutra, 1.20.6 Ethics that constitute a dharma|dharmic life – that is a moral, ethical, virtuous life – evolve in vedas and upanishads. Ethical subjects and questions are debated by various schools of Hinduism, quite extensively, in numerous texts on what is right conduct, when, how and why. Over time, new virtues were conceptualized and added by ancient Hindu scholars, some replaced, others merged. For example, Samhita|Manusamhita initially listed ten virtues necessary for a human being to live a "dharmic" life: "Dhriti" (courage), "Kshama" (forgiveness), "Dama" (temperance), "Asteya" (Non-covetousness/Non-stealing), "Saucha" (inner purity), "Indriyani-graha" (control of senses), "dhi" (reflective prudence), "vidya" (wisdom), "satyam" (truthfulness), "akrodha" (freedom from anger).Tiwari, K. N. (1998), Classical Indian Ethical Thought: A Philosophical Study of Hindu, Jaina, and Buddhist Morals, Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, , pp 52-55 In later verses, this list was reduced to five virtues by the same scholar, by merging and creating a more broader concept. The shorter list of virtues became: "Ahimsa" (Ahimsa|Non-violence), "Dama" (Temperance (virtue)|self restraint), "Asteya" (Non-covetousness/Non-stealing), "Saucha" (inner purity), "Satyam" (truthfulness).Gupta, B. (2006). BHAGAVAD GĪTĀ AS DUTY AND VIRTUE ETHICS. Journal of Religious Ethics, 34(3), 373-395.Mohapatra & Mohapatra, Hinduism: Analytical Study, ; see pages 37-40 The Persian historian Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī|Al Biruni who visited and lived in India for 16 years in the early 11th century, describes the concept of ethics and virtuous behavior among Hindus of his times. Of ethical mandates among Hindus, a literal translation of his Persian language manuscript includes (1) A man shall not kill; (2) nor lie; (3) nor steal; (4) nor whore; (5) nor hoard up treasures.Alberuni's India (v. 1), , Columbia University Libraries, London : Kegan Paul, Trübner & Co., (1910), page 73-75 These correspond to five "Yamas" of ancient Hindu ethics: Ahimsa (non-violence), Satya (truth, non-falsehood), Asteya (non-stealing), Brahmacharya (celibacy if unmarried and non-cheating on one's partner if married), and Aparigraha (non-possessiveness).<ref name=a ...
