  File:Garumamphoren.JPG|thumb|upright|Garum amphorae from Pompeii "Garum" is a fermentation (food)|fermented fish sauce that was used as a condiment(R. Zahn), "Real-Encyclopaedia der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft", s.v. "Garum", 1st Series "7" (1912) pp. 841–849. in the cuisines of Phoenicia, Ancient Greek cuisine|ancient Greece, Ancient Roman cuisine|Rome, Carthage and later Byzantine cuisine|Byzantium. "Liquamen" is a similar preparation, and at times they were synonymous.  Although garum enjoyed its greatest popularity in the Western Mediterranean and the Roman world, it was earlier used by the Ancient Greece|Greeks. Miles, Richard. Carthage Must Be Destroyed: The Rise and Fall of an Ancient Civilization. Penguin, 2011.Downie, David. "A Roman Anchovy's Tale." Gastronomica: The Journal of Critical Food Studies 3, no. 2 (2003): 25-28.  Like modern fermented fish sauce and soy sauce, garum was a rich source of umami flavoring due to the presence of Glutamate flavoring|glutamates. It was used along with Murri (condiment)|murri in medieval Byzantine cuisine|Byzantine and Arab cuisine to give a savory flavor to dishes. Murri may derive from garum. ==Manufacture and export== Pliny the Elder and Isidore of Seville derive the Latin word  from the Greek language|Greek  (),"Etymologiae|Origines" 20.3.19; , citing D'Arcy W. Thompson, "A Glossary of Greek Fishes" (London, 1947), p. 43. a food named by Aristophanes, Sophocles, and Aeschylus. Garos may have been a type of fish, or a fish sauce similar to garum. Pliny stated that garum was made from fish intestines, with salt, creating a liquor, the garum, and the fish paste named (h)allec or allex (similar to , this paste was a byproduct of fish sauce production). A concentrated garum evaporated down to a thick paste with salt crystals was called muria; it would have been used to salt and flavor foods. The 10th century Byzantine manual "Geoponica|Geōponika: Agricultural pursuits" includes the following recipe for "liquamen":"Geoponica|Geōponika: Agricultural pursuits," Vol. II, pp. 299–300; translated from the Greek by Thomas Owen; London 1806.  File:Factoría de salazones 001.jpg|thumb|Ruins of a garum factory in Baelo Claudia in Spain Garum was produced in various grades consumed by all social classes. After the liquid was ladled off of the top of the mixture, the remains of the fish, called , was used by the poorest classes to flavour their staple porridge or farinata. The finished product—the  of Martial's epigramMartial, "Epigrams" 13.—was apparently mild and subtle in flavor. The best garum fetched extraordinarily high prices,Toussaint-Samat, "The History of Food", revised ed. 2009, p. 338f. and salt could be substituted for it in a simpler dish. Garum appears in many recipes featured in the Roman cookbook . For example, Apicius (8.6.2–3) gives a recipe for lamb stew, calling for the meat to be cooked with onion and coriander, pepper, lovage, cumin, , oil, and wine, then thickened with flour."The Roman Cookery Book", trans. Flower and Rosenbaum, pp. 188–89. The same cookbook mentions garum being used as Broth|fish stock to flavor chopped Malva nicaeensis#Plant uses and properties|mallow leaves fried in a skillet.Apicius, "De Re Coquinaria" (Book III, section )  In the first century AD, "liquamen" was a sauce distinct from "garum", as indicated throughout the  "Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" IV. By the fifth century or earlier, however, "liquamen" had come to refer to "garum".Curtis, Robert I (1983)  "The Classical Journal", "78" (3): 232–240. The available evidence suggests that the sauce was typically made by crushing the innards of (fatty) pelagic fishes, particularly anchovies, but also sprats, sardines, mackerel, or tuna, and then fermenting them in brine.Curtis RI (2009)  "American Journal of Clinical Nutrition", "90" (3): 712S–718S. Grainger S (2006)  In: Pages 206–210, Richard Hosking (Ed.) "Authenticity in the Kitchen", Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery, 2005. .Jashemski WMF and Meyer FG (2002)  Cambridge University Press, page 274. .Zaret, PM (2004)  "Repast", "20" (4) : 3–4 and 8. In most surviving "tituli picti" inscribed on amphorae, where the fish ingredient is shown, the fish is mackerel. Under the best conditions, the fermentation process took about 48 hours.  The manufacture and export of garum was an element of the prosperity of coastal Colonies in the ancient world|Greek emporia from the Ligurian coast of Gaul to the coast of Hispania Baetica, and perhaps an impetus for Roman penetration of these coastal regions.Toussaint-Samat (2009). Although garum was a staple of the Roman Empire's cuisine, few production sites are known to have existed in the Eastern Mediterranean. In 2019 a small 1st-century factory was discovered near Ashkelon.<!-- let's find a better source--> A 2013 storm uncovered Neapolis, a major center of garum production, at Nabeul in Tunisia. Pliny the Elder spoke of a type of garum that Roman Jews may have used, as normal garum may not have contained exclusively kosher seafood. In the ruins of Pompeii, jars were found containing "kosher garum", suggesting an equal popularity among Jews there. Each port had its own traditional recipe, but by the time of Augustus, Romans considered the best to be garum from Cartagena, Spain|Cartagena and Cádiz|Gades in Baetica. This product was called "garum sociorum", "garum of the allies". The ruins of a garum factory remain at the Baetian site of Baelo Claudia (in present-day Tarifa) and Carteia (San Roque, Cádiz|San Roque). Other sites are a large garum factory at Cadiz|Gades (Cadiz) and at Málaga under the Museo Picasso Málaga|Picasso museum.  File:Fábrica romana de Salga 05.jpg|thumb|upright|Ancient Roman garum factory in Portugal Garum was a major export product from Hispania to Rome, and gained the S'Argamassa Roman Fish Farm|towns a certain amount of prestige. The garum of Lusitania (in present-day Portugal) was also highly prized in Rome, and was shipped directly from the harbour of Lacobriga (Lagos, Portugal|Lagos). A former Roman garum factory can be visited in the Baixa area of central Lisbon.Millennium bcp Foundation, Rua dos Correeiros 21  Fossae Marianae in Narbonensis|southern Gaul, located on the southern tip of present-day France, served as a distribution hub for Western Europe, including Gaul, Germania, and Roman Britain.Curtis, Robert I. 1988. "Spanish Trade in Salted Fish Products in the 1st and 2nd Centuries A.D. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology and Underwater Exploration". XXXIX. 205–210. Garum factories were also located in the province of Mauretania Tingitana (modern Morocco), for example at Ancient Cotta|Cotta and Lixus (ancient city)|Lixus. Aulus Umbricius Scaurus|Umbricius Scaurus' production of garum was key to the economy of Pompeii. The factories where garum was produced in Pompeii have not been uncovered, perhaps indicating that they lay outside the walls of the city. The production of garum created such unpleasant smells that factories were generally relegated to the outskirts of cities. In 2008, archaeologists used the residue from garum found in containers in Pompeii to confirm the August date of the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. The garum had been made entirely of bogue (fish)|bogues, fish that congregate in the summer months. ==Cuisine== File:Garum Mosaik Pompeji.JPG|thumb|upright|Mosaic depicting a "Flower of Garum" jug with a "titulus" reading "from the workshop of the garum importer Aulus Umbricius Scaurus"G(ari) F(los) SCOM(bri) SCAURI EX ...
