  "Gekkonidae" (the "common geckos") is the largest family of geckos, containing over 950 described species in 64 genera. Members of the Gekkonidae comprise many of the most widespread gecko species, including house geckos ("Hemidactylus"), tokay geckos ("Gekko"), day geckos ("Phelsuma"), mourning geckos ("Lepidodactylus") and dtellas ("Gehyra"). Gekkonid geckos occur globally and are particularly species-rich in tropical areas. Hemidactylus geckos are one of the most species-rich and widely distributed of all reptile genera.  Carranza, S., and E. .. Arnold. "Systematics, Biogeography, and Evolution of Hemidactylus Geckos (Reptilia: Gekkonidae) Elucidated Using Mitochondrial DNA Sequences." Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, vol. 38, no. 2, Elsevier Inc, 2006, pp. 531–45, . == Fossils == The earliest known gekkonidae fossil record "Yantarogekko" was found in Eocene-Aged Baltic amber. == Distribution == Species within the Gekkonidae family can be located in every warm land area, furthermore, many genera are capable of widespread geographical habitation. Genus "Hemidactylus" alone supports this claim as it can be identified in all sub-tropical areas of the world. However, many other genera exist that are endemic, for example, genera "afroedura", and "afrogecko", are distributed in the continent of Africa. The range of genus "Lepidodactylus" stretches from South Asia to Oceania; this genus also accounts for several island species. The genera listed here do not account for all Gekkonidae subspecies and are used only as examples of distribution, for a full list see section 'Genera'. ==Genera== Gekkonidae contains the following genera: Possibly belonging to the family: "Yantarogekko" (fossil) ==Phylogeny== Pyron, et al. (2013)Pyron, R Alexander, Frank T Burbrink and John J Wiens. 2013. A phylogeny and revised classification of Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2013 13:93.  presents the following classification of "Gekkonidae" genera, based on molecular phylogenetics.  |2="Perochirus", "Urocotyledon", "Ebenavia", "Paroedura", "Ailuronyx", "Calodactylodes", "Ptenopus", "Narudasia", "Cnemaspis", "Uroplatus", "Paragehyra", "Christinus", "Afrogecko", "Cryptactites", "Matoatoa", "Afroedura", "Geckolepis", "Homopholis", "Blaesodactylus", "Goggia", "Rhoptropus", "Elasmodactylus", "Chondrodactylus", "Colopus", "Pachydactylus", "Cnemaspis", "Rhoptropella", "Lygodactylus", "Phelsuma" }} }} ==References==      Category:Gekkonidae|  Category:Lizard families Category:Taxa named by John Edward Gray Category:Geckos Category:Extant Eocene first appearances  bcl:Tukô
