   File:Oostende Sint-Petrus-en-Pauluskerk R02.jpg|thumb|350px|Sint-Petrus-en-Pauluskerk in Ostend (Belgium), built between 1899 and 1908 "Gothic Revival" (also referred to as "Victorian Gothic", "neo-Gothic", or "Gothick") is an Architectural style|architectural movement that began in the late 1840s in England. The movement gained momentum and expanded in the first half of the 19th century, as increasingly serious and learned admirers of the neo-Gothic styles sought to revive medieval Gothic architecture, intending to complement or even supersede the Neoclassical architecture|neoclassical styles prevalent at the time. Gothic Revival draws upon features of medieval examples, including decorative patterns, finials, lancet windows, and hood moulds. By the middle of the 19th century, Gothic Revival had become the preeminent architectural style in the Western world, only to fall out of fashion in the 1880s and early 1890s. The Gothic Revival movement's roots are intertwined with philosophical movements associated with Catholicism and a re-awakening of high church or Anglo-Catholic belief concerned by the growth of religious nonconformism. Ultimately, the "Anglo-Catholicism" tradition of religious belief and style became known for its intrinsic appeal in the third quarter of the 19th century. Gothic Revival architecture varied considerably in its faithfulness to both the ornamental style and principles of construction of its medieval original, sometimes amounting to little more than pointed window frames and touches of neo-Gothic decoration on a building otherwise on a wholly 19th-century plan and using contemporary materials and construction methods, most notably in the use of iron and, after the 1880s, steel in ways never seen in medieval exemplars. File:Savannah cathedral 2015 17 046.jpg|thumb|250px|The Cathedral of St. John the Baptist (Savannah, Georgia)|Cathedral of St. John the Baptist, Savannah, Georgia|Savannah (Georgia (U.S. state)|Georgia, United States) In parallel with the ascendancy of neo-Gothic styles in 19th-century England, interest spread to the rest of Europe, Australia, Africa and the Americas; the 19th and early 20th centuries saw the construction of very large numbers of Gothic Revival structures worldwide. The influence of Revivalism (architecture)|Revivalism had nevertheless peaked by the 1870s. New architectural movements, sometimes related as in the Arts and Crafts movement, and sometimes in outright opposition, such as Modern architecture|Modernism, gained ground, and by the 1930s the architecture of the Victorian era was generally condemned or ignored. The later 20th century saw a revival of interest, manifested in the United Kingdom by the establishment of the Victorian Society in 1958. ==Roots== The rise of evangelicalism in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries saw in England a reaction in the high church movement which sought to emphasise the continuity between the established church and the pre-Reformation Catholic church. Architecture, in the form of the Gothic Revival, became one of the main weapons in the high church's armoury. The Gothic Revival was also paralleled and supported by "medievalism", which had its roots in antiquarian concerns with survivals and curiosities. As "industrialisation" progressed, a reaction against machine production and the appearance of factories also grew. Proponents of the picturesque such as Thomas Carlyle and Augustus Pugin took a critical view of industrial society and portrayed pre-industrial medieval society as a golden age. To Pugin, Gothic architecture was infused with the Christian values that had been supplanted by classicism and were being destroyed by industrialisation. Gothic Revival also took on political connotations; with the "rational" and "radical" Neoclassical style being seen as associated with republicanism and liberalism (as evidenced by its use in the United States and to a lesser extent in French Revolution|Republican France), the more spiritual and traditional Gothic Revival became associated with monarchism and conservatism, which was reflected by the choice of styles for the rebuilt government centres of the British parliament's Palace of Westminster in London, the Canadian Parliament Hill|Parliament Buildings in Ottawa and the Hungarian Parliament Building in Budapest. In English literature, the architectural Gothic Revival and classical Romanticism gave rise to the Gothic novel genre, beginning with "The Castle of Otranto" (1764) by Horace Walpole, and inspired a 19th-century genre of medieval poetry that stems from the pseudo-bardic poetry of "Ossian".  Poems such as "Idylls of the King" by Alfred, Lord Tennyson recast specifically modern themes in medieval settings of King Arthur|Arthurian romance. In German literature, the Gothic Revival also had a grounding in literary fashions. ==Survival and revival== File:Tom Tower, Christ Church 2004-01-21.jpg|thumb|upright=1.0|Tom Tower, Oxford, by Christopher Wren|Sir Christopher Wren 1681–82, to match the Tudor surroundings Gothic architecture began at the Basilica of Saint Denis near Paris, and the Cathedral of Sens in 1140 and ended with a last flourish in the early 16th century with buildings like Henry VII Lady Chapel|Henry&nbsp;VII's Chapel at Westminster. However, Gothic architecture did not die out completely in the 16th century but instead lingered in on-going cathedral-building projects; at Oxford University|Oxford and Cambridge University|Cambridge Universities, and in the construction of churches in increasingly isolated rural districts of England, France, Germany, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and in Spain. St Columb's Cathedral|Londonderry Cathedral (completed 1633) was a major new structure in the Perpendicular Gothic style. File:Zdar Zelena hora 19.jpg|thumb|left|upright|Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk by Jan Santini Aichel (around 1720) In Bologna, in 1646, the Baroque architect Carlo Rainaldi constructed Vault (architecture)|Gothic vaults (completed 1658) for the Basilica of San Petronio in Bologna, which had been under construction since 1390; there, the Gothic context of the structure overrode considerations of the current architectural mode. Guarino Guarini, a 17th-century Theatine monk active primarily in Turin, recognized the "Gothic order" as one of the primary systems of architecture and made use of it in his practice. Likewise, Gothic architecture survived in an urban setting during the later 17th century, as shown in Oxford and Cambridge, where some additions and repairs to Gothic buildings were considered to be more in keeping with the style of the original structures than contemporary Baroque architecture|Baroque. Christopher Wren|Sir Christopher Wren's Tom Tower for Christ Church, Oxford|Christ Church, University of Oxford,}} and, later, Nicholas Hawksmoor's west towers of Westminster Abbey, blur the boundaries between what is called "Gothic survival" and the Gothic Revival. Throughout France in the 16th and 17th centuries, churches such as Saint-Eustache, Paris|St-Eustache continued to be built following Gothic forms cloaked in classical details, until the arrival of Baroque architecture. Even in Central Europe of the late 17th and 18th centuries, where Baroque dominated, some architects used elements of the Gothic style. The most important example is Jan Santini Aichel, whose Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk in Žďár nad Sázavou, Czech Republic, represents a peculiar and creative synthesis of Baroque and Gothic. An example of another and less striking use of the Gothic style in the time is the Basilica of Our Lady of Hungary in Márianosztra, Hungary, whose sanctuary was long considered authentically Gothic, because the 18th-century architect used medieval shapes to emphasize the continuity of the monastic community with its 14th-century founders.   During the mid-18th century rise of Romanticism, an increased interest and awareness of the Middle Ages in history|Middle Ages among influential connoisseurs created a more appreciative approach to selected medieval arts, beginning with church architecture, the tomb monuments of royal and noble personages, stained glass, and late Gothic illuminated manuscripts. Other Gothic arts, such as tapestries and metalwork, continued to be disregarded as barbaric and crude, however sentimental and nationalist associations with historical figures were as strong in this early revival as purely aesthetic concerns. File:Strawberry Hill House 4 (29886640996).jpg|thumb|275px|left|Strawberry Hill House, Twickenham, London; 1749 by Horace Walpole (1717–1797). "The seminal house of the Gothic Revival in England", it established the "Strawberry Hill Gothic" style German Romanticism|German Romanticists (including philosopher and writer Goethe and architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel), began to appreciate the picturesque character of ruins—"picturesque" becoming a new aesthetic quality—and those mellowing effects of time that the Japanese call "wabi-sabi" and that Horace Walpole independently admired, mildly tongue-in-cheek, as "the true rust of the Barons' wars".}} The "Gothick" details of Walpole's Twickenham villa, Strawberry Hill House begun in 1749, appealed to the rococo tastes of the time,}} and were fairly quickly followed by James Talbot at Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire. By the 1770s, thoroughly neoclassical architects such as Robert Adam and James Wyatt were prepared to provide Gothic details in drawing-rooms, libraries and chapels and, for William Beckford at Fonthill Abbey|Fonthill in Wiltshire, a complete romantic vision of a Gothic abbey. is perhaps the earliest Gothic Revival structure in England.}} Some of the earliest architectural examples of the revived are found in Scotland. Inveraray Castle, constructed from 1746 for the Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll|Duke of Argyll, with design input from William Adam (architect)|William Adam, displays the incorporation of turrets.}} The architectural historian John Gifford writes that the castellations were the "symbolic assertion of the still quasi-feudal power  exercised over the inhabitants within his heritable jurisdictions". Most buildings were still largely in the established Palladian style, but some houses incorporated external features of the Scots baronial style. Robert Adam's houses in this style include Mellerstain and Wedderburn Castle|Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton Castle in East Lothian, but it is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle, Ayrshire, remodelled by Adam from 1777. The eccentric landscape designer Batty Langley even attempted to "improve" Gothic forms by giving them classical proportions. File:Basilica of Saint Clotilde Sanctuary, Paris, France - Diliff.jpg|thumb|left|275px|Basilica of Sainte Clotilde Sanctuary, Paris, France A younger generation, taking Gothic architecture more seriously, provided the readership for John Britton's series "Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain", which began appearing in 1807. In 1817, Thomas Rickman wrote an "Attempt..." to name and define the se ...
