  The "Hopewell tradition", also called the "Hopewell culture" and "Hopewellian exchange", describes a network of Pre-Columbian era|precontact Native Americans in the United States|Native American cultures that flourished in settlements along rivers in the northeastern and midwestern Indigenous peoples of the Eastern Woodlands|Eastern Woodlands from 100 Before Common Era|BCE to 500 Common Era|CE, in the Middle Woodland|Middle Woodland period. The Hopewell tradition was not a single Archaeological culture|culture or society but a widely dispersed set of populations connected by a common network of trade routes. At its greatest extent, the Hopewell exchange system ran from the northern shores of Lake Ontario south to the Crystal River Indian Mounds in modern-day Florida. Within this area, societies exchanged goods and ideas, with the highest amount of activity along waterways, which were the main transportation routes. Peoples within the Hopewell exchange system received materials from all over the territory of what now comprises the mainland United States. Most of the items traded were exotic materials; they were delivered to peoples living in the major trading and manufacturing areas. These people converted raw materials into Product (business)|products and exported them through local and regional exchange networks. Hopewell communities traded finished goods, such as steatite platform pipes, far and wide; they have been found among grave goods in many burials outside the Midwest. ==Origins== Although the origins of the Hopewell are still under discussion, the Hopewell culture can also be considered a cultural climax.  <blockquote> Hopewell populations originated in western New York and moved south into Ohio, where they built upon the local Adena culture|Adena mortuary tradition. Or, Hopewell was said to have originated in western Illinois and spread by diffusion...  to southern Ohio. Similarly, the Havana Hopewell tradition was thought to have spread up the Illinois River and into southwestern Michigan, spawning Goodall Hopewell. (Dancey 114)</blockquote> American archaeologist Warren K. Moorehead popularized the term "Hopewell" after his 1891 and 1892 explorations of the Hopewell Culture National Historical Park|Hopewell Mound Group in Ross County, Ohio. The mound group was named after Mordecai Hopewell, whose family then owned the property where the earthworks are sited. What any of the various peoples now classified as Hopewellian called themselves is unknown; indeed, what language families they spoke is unknown. Archaeologists applied the term "Hopewell" to a broad range of cultures. Many of the Hopewell communities were temporary settlements of one to three households near rivers. They practiced a mixture of hunting, gathering, and horticulture. ==Politics and hierarchy== The Hopewell inherited from their Adena forebears an incipient social stratification. This increased social stability and reinforced sedentism, social stratification, specialized use of resources, and probably population growth. Hopewell societies cremated most of their deceased and reserved burial for only the most important people. In some sites, hunters apparently were given a higher status in the community: their graves were more elaborate and contained more status goods. The Hopewellian peoples had leaders, but they did not command the kind of centralized power to order armies of slaves or soldiers. These cultures likely accorded certain families a special place of privilege. Some scholars suggest that these societies were marked by the emergence of "Big man (anthropology)|big-men". These leaders acquired their positions because of their ability to persuade others to agree with them on important matters such as trade and religion. They also perhaps were able to develop influence by the creation of reciprocal obligations with other important members of the community. Whatever the source of their status and power, the emergence of "big-men" was another step toward the development of the highly structured and stratified sociopolitical organization called the chiefdom. The Hopewell settlements were linked by extensive and complex trading routes; these operated also as communication networks, and were a means to bring people together for important ceremonies. ==Mounds== File:Mound City Chillicothe Ohio HRoe 2008.jpg|thumb|right|Hopewell mounds from the Hopewell Culture National Historical Park|Mound City Group in Ohio Today, the best-surviving features of the Hopewell tradition era are earthwork mounds. Researchers have speculated about their purposes and debate continues. Great geometric Earthworks (archaeology)|earthworks are one of the most impressive Native American monuments throughout American prehistory, and were built by cultures following the Hopewell. Eastern Woodlands mounds typically have various geometric shapes and rise to impressive heights. Some of the gigantic sculpted earthworks, described as effigy mounds, were constructed in the shape of animals, birds, or writhing serpents.Nash, Gary B. "Red, White and Black: The Peoples of Early North America", Los Angeles, California: 2015. Chapter 1, p. 6. Due to considerable evidence and surveys, plus the good condition of the largest surviving mounds, more information can be obtained. Several scientists, including Dr. Bradley T. Lepper, Curator of Archaeology, Ohio Historical Society, hypothesize that the Octagon earthwork, part of the Newark Earthworks at Newark, Ohio, was a Moon|lunar observatory. He believes that it is oriented to the 18.6-year cycle of minimum and maximum lunar risings and settings on the local horizon. The Octagon covers more than 50 acres, the size of 100 football pitches. Dr. John Eddy completed an unpublished survey in 1978, and proposed a lunar major alignment for the Octagon. Ray Hively and Robert Horn of Earlham College in Richmond, Indiana, were the first researchers to analyze numerous lunar sightlines at the Newark Earthworks (1982) and the High Banks Works (1984) in Chillicothe, Ohio. Christopher Turner noted that the Fairground Circle in Newark, Ohio aligns to the sunrise on May 4, i.e. that it marks the May cross-quarter sunrise. In 1983, Turner demonstrated that the Hopeton earthworks encode various sunrise and moonrise patterns, including the winter and summer solstices, the equinoxes, the cross-quarter days, the lunar maximum events, and the lunar minimum events, due to their precise straight and parallel lines. William Romain (archaeologist)|William F. Romain has written a book on the subject of "astronomers, geometers, and magicians" at the earthworks. Many of the mounds also contain various types of human burials. Precious grave or burial good have also been found in the mounds. These include objects of adornment made of copper, mica and obsidian, materials imported to the region from hundreds of miles away. Stone and ceramics were also fashioned into intricate shapes. ==Artwork== The Hopewell created some of the finest craftwork and artwork of the Americas. Most of their works had some religious significance, and their graves were filled with necklaces, ornate carvings made from bone or wood, decorated Hopewell pottery|ceremonial pottery, ear plugs, and pendants. Some graves were lined with woven mats, mica (a mineral consisting of thin glassy sheets), or stones. The Hopewell produced artwork in a greater variety and with more exotic materials than their predecessors the Adena. Grizzly bear teeth, Pearl#Freshwater and saltwater pearls|fresh water pearls, sea shells, sharks' teeth, copper, and small quantities of silver were crafted as elegant pieces. The Hopewell artisans were expert carvers of pipestone, and many of the mortuary mounds are full of exquisitely carved statues and pipes. Excavation of the Mound of Pipes at Hopewell Culture National Historical Park|Mound City found more than 200 stone smoking pipes; these depicted animals and birds in well-realized three-dimensional form. More than 130 such artifacts were excavated from the Tremper Mound and Works|Tremper site in Scioto County, Ohio|Scioto County. Some artwork was made from carved human bones. A rare mask found at Mound City was created using a human skull as a face plate.  Hopewell artists created both abstract and realistic portrayals of the human form. One tubular pipe is so accurate in form that the model was identified by researchers as an achondroplastic (Chondrodystrophy|chondrodystropic) dwarfism|dwarf. Many other figurines are highly detailed in dress, ornamentation, and hairstyles. An example of the abstract human forms is the "Mica Hand" from the Hopewell Site in Ross County, Ohio. Delicately cut from a piece of mica, more than 11&nbsp;inches long and 6&nbsp;inches wide, the hand piece was likely worn or carried for public viewing.They would also make beaded work. <gallery widths="190px" heights="180px" > File:Hand Hopewell mica.jpg|Carved mica hand, Hopewell Mounds File:Serpent effigy, Hopewell culture, Turner Group, Mound 4, altar, Little Miami Valley, Ohio, 200 BC to 500 AD, mica - Native American collection - Peabody Museum, Harvard University - DSC06095.jpg|Serpent effigy, Turner Group, Mound 4, Little Miami Valley, OH File:Hopewell SerpMd pipe points earspool HRoe 2009.jpg| Hopewell pipe, points, and earspool on display at Serpent Mound File:Adena SerpMd gorget points HRoe 2009.jpg|Gorgets and points from the Adena culture, found at Serpent Mound File:Hopewell culture nhp raven effigy pipe chillicothe ohio 2006.jpg|Raven effigy pipe, Mound City Group|Mound City File:British Museum otter pipe.jpg|Otter effigy pipe, Mound City File:Native North American - Bird Figure - Walters 2006155 - Side.jpg|Bird figure, Tremper Mound and Works|Tremper Mounds File:Hopewell copper spider.jpg|Copper spider(?) from a Ross County mound File:Hopewell Bird Head carved on Bone.jpg|Bird head carved on bone, Hopewell Mounds File:Hopewell culture falcon.jpg|Repoussé copper falcon, Mound City File:Copper repousse bird anhm.jpg|Repoussé copper falcon at American Museum of Natural History File:Hopewell Culture Pot.jpg|Pot with a bird design, Hopewell site </gallery> ==Local expressions of Hopewellian traditions== In addition to the noted Ohio Hopewell, a number of other Middle Woodland period cultures are known to have been involved in the Hopewell tradition and participated in the Hopewell exchange network.  The Armstrong culture was a Hopewell group in  ...
