   File:Bradshaw rock paintings.jpg|thumb|Gwion Gwion rock art found in the north-west Kimberley region of Western Australia File:Aboriginal rock art on the Barnett River, Mount Elizabeth Station.jpg|thumb|Pictographs known as Wandjina in the Wunnumurra Gorge, Barnett River, Kimberley, Western Australia  "Indigenous Australian art" includes art made by Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander|Torres Strait Islander peoples, including collaborations with others. It includes works in a wide range of media including painting on leaves, bark painting, wood carving, rock carving, watercolour painting, sculpting, Aboriginal ceremony|ceremonial clothing and sand painting; art by Indigenous Australians that pre-dates Colonisation of Australia|European colonisation by thousands of years, up to the present day. ==Traditional Indigenous art== There are several types of and methods used in making Aboriginal art, including rock painting, dot painting, rock engravings, bark painting, carvings, sculptures, weaving and string art. Australian Aboriginal art is the oldest unbroken tradition of art in the world.  Image:Yankee Hat art-MJC.jpg|thumb|Aboriginal rock painting at Namadgi National Park featuring a kangaroo, dingoes, emus, humans and an echidna or turtle Image:Baiame Wiradjuri.jpg|right|thumb|This photo shows the painting of Baiame made by an unknown Wiradjuri artist in "Baiame's cave", near Singleton, NSW. Notice the length of his arms which extend to the two trees either side. Rock art, including painting and engraving or carving (petroglyphs), can be found at sites throughout Australia. Examples of rock art have been found that are believed to depict extinct megafauna such as "Genyornis" and "Thylacoleo" in the Pleistocene era as well as more recent historical events such as the arrival of European ships. The oldest examples of rock art, in Western Australia's Pilbara region and the Olary, South Australia|Olary district of South Australia, are estimated to be up to around 40,000 years old. , Aboriginal Art Online, retrieved April 2008. The oldest firmly dated evidence of rock art painting in Australia is a charcoal drawing on a small rock fragment found during the excavation of the Gabarnmung|Narwala Gabarnmang rock shelter in south-western Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory. Dated at 28,000 years, it is one of the oldest known pieces of rock art on Earth with a confirmed date. It is thought this decorated fragment may have once formed part of a larger ceiling artwork, however, the shape of the original motif is unknown. The oldest reliably dated unambiguous, in-situ rock art motif in Australia is a large painting of a Macropodidae|macropod from a rock shelter in Western Australia's Kimberley (Western Australia)|Kimberley region, radiometrically dated in a February 2021 study at approximately 17,300 years old. Gwion Gwion rock art (the "Bradshaw rock paintings", also referred to as Giro Giro"Worms, Ernest "Contemporary and prehistoric rock paintings in Central and Northern North Kimberley" Anthropos Switzerland 1955 p. 555), initially named after Joseph Bradshaw (pastoralist)|Joseph Bradshaw, who first reported them in 1891, consists of a series of rock paintings on caves in the Kimberley region of Western Australia.Doring, Jeff "Gwion Gwion: Chemins Secrets Et Sacrés Des Ngarinyin, Aborigènes D'Australie" (Gwion Gwion: Secret and Sacred Pathways of the Ngarinyin Aboriginal People of Australia) Könemann 2000  p. 55  A 2020 study puts this art at about 12,000 years old. The "Maliwawa Figures" were documented in a study led by Paul Taçon and published in "Australian Archaeology" in September 2020. The art includes 572 images across 87 sites in northwest Arnhem Land, from Awunbarna (Mount Borradaile) area across to the Wellington Range, Northern Territory|Wellington Range. They are estimated to have been drawn between 6,000 and 9,400 years ago. The find is described as very rare, not only in style, but in their depiction of bilby|bilbies (not known historically in Arnhem Land) and the first known depiction of a dugong. The art, all paintings in red to Mulberry (color)|mulberry colour apart from one drawing, and in a Realism (arts)|naturalistic style, had not been described in the literature before this study. They are large, and depict relationships between people and animals, a rare theme in rock art. Bilbies, thylacines and dugong have been extinct in Arnhem land for millennia. The art was first seen by the 2008-2009 researchers, but were only studied in field research lasting from 2016 to 2018. The figures were named by Ronald Lamilami, a senior traditional owner. According to Tacon, "The Maliwawa back-to-back figures are the oldest known for western Arnhem Land and it appears this painting convention began with the Maliwawa style. It continues to the present with bark paintings and paintings on paper". Taçon draws comparisons between the Maliwawa Figures and George Chaloupka's Dynamic Figures style, where the subject matter consists of about 89 percent humans, compared with 42% of the Maliwawa Figures. There is, however, much complexity and debate regarding the classification of rock art style in Arnhem Land. Other painted rock art sites include Laura, Queensland, Ubirr, in the Kakadu National Park, Uluru, and Carnarvon Gorge. Rock engraving, or petroglyphs, are created by methods which vary depending on the type of rock being used and other factors. There are several different types of rock art across Australia, the most famous of which is Murujuga in Western Australia, the Sydney rock engravings around Sydney in New South Wales, and the Panaramitee rock art in Central Australia. The Toowoomba engravings, depicting carved animals and humans, have their own peculiar style not found elsewhere in Australia. The rock engravings at Murujuga are said to be the world's largest collection of petroglyphs and includes images of extinct animals such as the thylacine. Activity prior to the last ice age until col ...
