    }}   "Indian philosophy" refers to philosophical traditions of the Indian subcontinent. A traditional Hindu classification divides āstika and nāstika schools of philosophy, depending on one of three alternate criteria: whether it believes the Vedas as a valid source of knowledge; whether the school believes in the premises of Brahman and Atman (Hinduism)|Atman; and whether the school believes in afterlife and Deva (Hinduism)|Devas.John Bowker, "Oxford Dictionary of World Religions", p. 259 There are six major schools of Vedic Hindu philosophy|philosophy—Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Samkhya, Yoga (philosophy)|Yoga, Mīmāṃsā and Vedanta, and five major heterodox (sramanic) schools—Jainism|Jain, Buddhism|Buddhist, Ajivika, Ajñana, and Charvaka. However, there are other methods of classification; Vidyaranya for instance identifies sixteen schools of Indian philosophy by including those that belong to the Shaivism|Śaiva and Raseśvara traditions.Cowell and Gough, p. xii.Nicholson, pp. 158-162. The main schools of Indian philosophy were formalised and recognised chiefly between 500 BCE and the late centuries of the Common Era. Competition and integration between the various schools was intense, despite later claims of Hindu unity. Some schools like Jainism, Buddhism, Yoga, Śaiva and Vedanta survived, but others, like Ajñana, Charvaka and Ājīvika did not. Ancient and medieval era texts of Indian philosophies include extensive discussions on ontology (metaphysics, Brahman-Atman (Hinduism)|Atman, Sunyata-Anatta), reliable means of knowledge (epistemology, Pramanas), value system (axiology) and other topics.;<br /> ==Common themes== Indian philosophies share many concepts such as dharma, karma, samsara, dukkha, renunciation, meditation, with almost all of them focusing on the ultimate goal of liberation of the individual from dukkha and samsara through diverse range of spiritual practices (moksha, nirvana). They differ in their assumptions about the nature of existence as well as the specifics of the path to the ultimate liberation, resulting in numerous schools that disagreed with each other. Their ancient doctrines span the diverse range of philosophies found in other ancient cultures. ==Orthodox schools==  File:Raja Ravi Varma - Sankaracharya.jpg|thumb|Hindu philosophy has a diversity of traditions and numerous saints and scholars, such as Adi Shankara of Advaita Vedanta school. Many Hinduism|Hindu intellectual traditions were classified during the medieval period of Brahmanic-Sanskritic scholasticism into a standard list of six orthodox (Astika) schools (Hindu philosophy|darshanas), the "Six Philosophies" (""), all of which accept the testimony of the Vedas. These "Six Philosophies" ("ṣaḍ-darśana") are: * "Samkhya|"Sāṃkhya"," a philosophical tradition which regards the universe as consisting of two independent realities: "Purusha|puruṣa" (the perceiving consciousness) and "prakṛti" (perceived reality, including mind, perception, "kleshas (Hinduism)|kleshas", and matter) and which describes a soteriology based on this duality, in which "purush" is discerned and disentangled from the impurities of "prakriti". It has included atheistic authors as well as some theistic thinkers, and forms the basis of much of subsequent Indian philosophy. * Yoga (philosophy)|""Yoga"", a school similar to "Sāṃkhya" (or perhaps even a branch of it) which accepts a personal god and focuses on yogic practice. * Nyaya|""Nyāya"", a philosophy which focuses on logic and epistemology. It accepts six kinds of pramanas (epistemic warrants): (1) perception, (2) inference, (3) comparison and analogy, (4) postulation, derivation from circumstances, (5) non-perception, negative/cognitive proof and (6) word, testimony of past or present reliable experts. "Nyāya" defends a form of direct Philosophical realism|realism and a theory of Substance theory|substances ("dravya"). * Vaisheshika|""Vaiśeṣika"", closely related to the "Nyāya" school, this tradition focused on the metaphysics of substance, and on defending a theory of atoms. Unlike "Nyāya", they only accept two pramanas: perception and inference. * ""Mīmāṃsā|Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā"", a school which focuses on exegesis of the Vedas, philology and the interpretation of Vedic ritual. * ""Vedanta|Vedānta"" (also called "Uttara Mīmāṃsā"), focuses on interpreting the philosophy of the Upanishads, particularly the soteriological and metaphysical ideas relating to Atman and Brahman. Sometimes these groups are often coupled into three groups for both historical and conceptual reasons: "Nyāya"-"Vaiśeṣika", "Sāṃkhya"-"Yoga", and "Mīmāṃsā"-"Vedānta". Each tradition included different currents and sub-schools, for example, Vedānta was divided among the sub-schools of Advaita Vedanta|Advaita (Nondualism|non-dualism), Visishtadvaita (qualified non-dualism), Dvaita (Dualistic cosmology#In Hinduism|dualism), Dvaitadvaita (dualistic non-dualism), Suddhadvaita, and Achintya Bheda Abheda (inconceivable oneness and difference). Besides these schools Mādhava Vidyāraṇya also includes the following of the aforementioned theistic philosophies based on the Agamas and Tantras: * Pasupata, school of Shaivism by Nakulisa * Shaiva Siddhanta|Saiva, the theistic Sankhya school * Pratyabhijna|Pratyabhijña, the recognitive school * Raseśvara, the mercurial school * Pāṇini Darśana, the grammarian school (which clarifies the theory of Sphoṭa) The systems mentioned here are not the only orthodox systems, they are the chief ones, and there are other orthodox schools. These systems, accept the authority of Vedas and are regarded as orthodox (astika) schools of Hindu philosophy; besides these, schools that do not accept the authority of the Vedas are heterodox (nastika) systems such as Buddhism, Jainism, Ajivika and Charvaka.Roy Perrett (2000), Indian Philosophy, Routledge, , page 88Sushil Mittal & Gene Thursby (2004), The Hindu World, Routledge, , pages 729-730 This orthodox-heterodox terminology is a construct of Western languages, and lacks scholarly roots in Sanskrit. According to Andrew Nicholson, there have been various Heresiology|heresiological translations of Āstika and Nāstika in 20th century literature on Indian philosophies, but quite many are unsophisticated and flawed.Andrew J. Nicholson (2013), Unifying Hinduism|Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History, Columbia University Press, , Chapter 9 * Charvaka is a materialism|materialistic and atheistic school of thought and, is noteworthy as evidence of a atheism in Hinduism|materialistic movement within Hinduism.Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore. "A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy"249. . ==Heterodox (Śramaṇic schools)==  Several Śramaṇa|Śramaṇic movements have existed before the 6th century BCE, and these influenced both the āstika and nāstika traditions of Indian philosophy.Reginald Ray (1999), Buddhist Saints in India, Oxford University Press, , pages 237-240, 247-249 The Śramaṇa|Śramaṇa movement gave rise to diverse range of heterodox beliefs, ranging from accepting or denying the concept of soul, atomism, antinomian ethics, materialism, atheism, agnosticism, fatalism to free will, idealization of extreme asceticism to that of family life, strict ahimsa (non-violence) and vegetarianism to permissibility of violence and meat-eating.Padmanabh S Jaini (2001), Collected papers on Buddhist Studies, Motilal Banarsidass, , pages 57-77 Notable philosophies that arose from Śramaṇa|Śramaṇic movement were Jainism, Pre-sectarian Buddhism|early Buddhism, Charvaka, Ajñana and Ājīvika.AL Basham (1951), History and Doctrines of the Ajivikas – a Vanished Indian Religion, Motilal Banarsidass, , pages 94-103   Ajñana was one of the nāstika or "heterodox" schools of ancient Indian philosophy, and the ancient school of radical Indian skepticism. It was a Śramaṇa movement and a major rival of early Buddhism and Jainism. They have been recorded in Buddhist and Jain texts. They held that it was impossible to obtain knowledge of metaphysical nature or ascertain the truth value of philosophical propositions; and even if knowledge was possible, it was useless and disadvantageous for final salvation. They were sophists who specialised in refutation without propagating any positive doctrine of their own.   File:1st Tirthankara Rishbha Rsabhanatha Adinath Jainism.jpg|thumb|left|Rishabhanatha, believed to have lived over a million years ago, is considered the founder of Jain religion in the present time cycle. Jain philosophy is the oldest Indian philosophy that separates body (matter) from the soul (consciousness) completely. Jainism was revived and re-established after Mahavira, the last and the 24th "Tirthankara", synthesised and revived the philosophies and promulgations of the ancient Śramaṇic traditions laid down by the first Jain tirthankara Rishabhanatha millions of years ago. According to Dundas, outside of the Jain tradition, historians date the Mahavira as about contemporaneous with the Buddha in the 5th-century BCE, and accordingly the historical Parshvanatha, based on the c. 250-year gap, is placed in 8th or 7th century BCE. Jainism is a Śramaṇic religion and rejected the authority of the Vedas. However, like all Indian religions, it shares the core concepts such as karma, ethical living, rebirth, samsara and moksha. Jainism places strong emphasis on asceticism, ahimsa (non-violence) and anekantavada (relativity of viewpoints) as a means of spiritual liberation, ideas that influenced other Indian traditions.  Jainism strongly upholds the individualistic nature of soul and personal responsibility for one's decisions; and that self-reliance and individual efforts alone are responsible for one's liberation. According to the Jain philosophy, the world ("Saṃsāra (Jainism)|Saṃsāra") is full of "hiṃsā" (violence). Therefore, one should direct all his efforts in attainment of Ratnatraya, that are Samyak Darshan (right perception), Samyak Gnana (right knowledge) and Samyak Chàritra (right conduct) which are the key requisites to attain liberation.   File:Gandhara Buddha (tnm).jpeg|thumb|upright=0.85|The Buddhist philosophy is based on the teachings of the Buddha. Buddhist philosophy is a system of thought which started with the teachings of Gautama Buddha|Siddhartha Gautama, Buddhahood|the Buddha, or "awakened one". Buddhism is founded on elements of the Śramaṇa|Śramaṇa movement, which flowered in the first half of the 1st millennium BCE, but its foundations contain novel ideas not found or accepted by other Sramana movements. Buddhism and Hinduism mutually influenced each other and shared many concepts, states Paul Williams, however it is now difficult to identify and describe these influences.{{cite book|author=Paul Williams |title=Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations |url=ht ...
