   The "intelligentsia" is a status class composed of the university-educated people of a society who engage in the complex mental labours by which they critique, shape, and lead in the politics, policies, and culture of their society;Ory, Pascal, and Sirinelli, Jean-François. "the Intellectuals in France: From the Dreyfus Affair to Our Days" ("Les Intellectuels en France: De l'affaire Dreyfus à nos jours") Paris: Armand Colin, 2002, p. 10. as such, the intelligentsia consists of scholars, academics, teachers, journalists, and literary writers.Williams, Raymond. "Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society" (1983) Rev. Ed., p. 170. Conceptually, the intelligentsia status class arose in the late 18th century, during the Partitions of Poland (1772–1795). Etymologically, the 19th-century Polish intellectual Bronisław Trentowski coined the term "inteligencja" (intellectuals) to identify and describe the university-educated and professionally active social stratum of the patriotic bourgeoisie; men and women whose intellectualism would provide moral and political leadership to Poland in opposing the cultural hegemony of the Russian Empire.Billington, James H. "Fire in the Minds of Men" (0000), p. 231. In Pre-revolutionary Russia|pre–Revolutionary (1917) Russia, the term "intelligentsiya" () identified and described the status class of university-educated people whose cultural capital — schooling, education, and Age of Enlightenment|intellectual enlightenment — allowed them to assume the moral initiative and the practical leadership required in the national, regional, and local politics of Russia."The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary" (1993) p. 1,387. In practice, the status and social function of the intelligentsia varied by society; in eastern Europe, the intellectuals were at the periphery of their societies, and thus were deprived of political influence and access to the effective levers of political power and of economic development. In western Europe the intellectuals were in the mainstream of their societies, and thus exercised cultural and political influence that granted access to the Power (social and political)|power of government office, such as the "Bildungsbürgertum", the cultured bourgeoisie of Germany, and the professions in Great Britain. ==Background== In a society, the "intelligentsia" is a status class of intellectuals whose social functions, politics, and national interests are (ostensibly) distinct from the functions of government, commerce, and the military."The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought" (1999) Allan Bullock and Stephen Trombley, Eds. p. 433. In "Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology" (1921), the political economist Max Weber applied the term "intelligentsia" in chronological and geographical frames of reference, such as "this Christian preoccupation with the formulation of dogmas was, in classical antiquity|Antiquity, particularly influenced by the distinctive character of ‘intelligentsia’, which was the product of Greek education", thus the "intelligentsia" originated as a social class of educated people created for the greater benefit of society.Weber, Max. "Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology",   In the 19th and 20th centuries, the Polish word and the sociologic concept of the "inteligencja" became a European usage to describe the social class of men and women who are the Intellectual|intellectuals of the countries of central and of eastern Europe; in Poland, the critical thinkers educated at university, in Russia, the nihilism|nihilists who opposed tradition|traditional values in the name of reason and Progressivism|progress. In the late 20th century, the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu said that the intelligentsia has two types of workers; (i) intellectual workers who create knowledge (practical and theoretic) and (ii) intellectual workers who create cultural capital. Sociologically, the Polish "inteligencja" translates to the "intellectuels" in France and the "Gebildete" in Germany."The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought" (1999) Allan Bullock and Stephen Trombley, Eds. p. 433. ==European history== File:Karol Libelt.PNG|thumb|upright|The philosopher Karol Libelt identified the social contradiction inherent to the intelligentsia being politically progressive, whilst also willing to work for the "status quo" of the State. File:Pyotr Dmitryevich Boborykin.jpg|thumb|upright|In Russia, the writer Pyotr Boborykin defined the intelligentsia as both the managers of a society, and as the creators of society's high culture. The intelligentsia existed as a social stratum in European societies before the term "inteligencja" was coined in 19th-century Poland, to identify the intellectual people whose professions placed them outside the traditional workplaces and labours of the town-and-country social classes (royalty, aristocracy, bourgeoisie) of a monarchy; thus the "inteligencja" are a social class native to the city. In their functions as a status class, the intellectuals realised the cultural development of cities, the dissemination of printed knowledge (literature, textbooks, newspapers), and the economic development of housing for rent (the tenement house) for the teacher, the journalist, and the civil servant. In "On Love of the fatherland" (1844), the Polish philosopher Karol Libelt used the term "inteligencja", which was the status class, composed of scholars, teachers, lawyers, and engineers, "et al." as the educated people of society who provide the moral leadership required to resolve the problems of society, hence the social function of the intelligentsia is to "guide for the reason of their higher enlightenment." In the 1860s, the journalist Pyotr Boborykin popularised the term "intelligentsiya" (интеллигенция) to identify and describe the Russian social stratum of people educated at university who engage in the intellectual occupations (law, medicine, engineering, the arts) who produce the culture and the dominant ideology by which society functions.С. В. Мотин. "". Известия Пензенского государственного педагогического университета им. В.Г. Белинского, 27, 2012 (in Russian)Пётр Боборыкин. "Русская интеллигенция". Русская мысль, 1904, № 12 (in Russian)Пётр Боборыкин. "". Сб. статей "В защиту интеллигенции". Москва, 1909, с. 119–138; первоначально опубл. в газете "Русское слово", No 111, 17 (30) мая, 1909 (in Russian) According to the theory of Dr. Vitaly Tepikin, the sociological traits usual to the intelligentsia of a society are: #advanced-for-their-time moral ideals, moral sensitivity to the neighbour, tact and gentleness in expression; #productive mental work, and in continual self-education; #patriotism based on faith in the people, and inexhaustible, self-less love for the small and the big motherlands; #inherent creativity in every stratum of the intelligentsia, and a tendency to asceticism; #an independent personality who speaks freely; #a critical attitude towards the government, and public condemnation of injustice; #loyalty to principle by conscience, grace under pressure, and tendency to self-denial; #an ambiguous perception of reality, which leads to political fickleness that sometimes becomes conservatism; #a sense of resentment, because politics and policies went unrealised; and withdrawal from the public sphere to the in-group; #quarrels about art, ideas, and ideology, which divide the subgroups who compose the intelligentsia.Tepikin, Vitaly. "Culture and Intelligentsia" (2006) Ivanovo: Ivanovo University Press, pp. 41–42. In "The Rise of the Intelligentsia, 1750–1831" (2008) Maciej Janowski said that the Polish intelligentsia were the think tank of the State, intellectual servants whose progressive social and economic policies decreased the social backwardness (illiteracy) of the Polish people, and also decreased Russian political repression in partitioned Poland.  = File:Wyczółkowski Ludwik Rydygier with his assistants.jpg|thumbnail|The surgeon Ludwik Rydygier and his assistants. (Leon Wyczółkowski)  In 1844 Poland, the term "inteligencja", identifying the intellectuals of a society, first was used by the philosopher Karol Libelt, which he described as a status class of people characterised by intellect and Polish nationalism; qualities of mind, character, and spirit that made them natural leaders of the modern Polish nation. That the intelligentsia were aware of their social status and of their duties to society: Educating the youth with the nationalist objective to restore the Republic of Poland; preserving the Polish language; and love of the patriotism|Fatherland. Nonetheless, the writers Stanisław Brzozowski (writer)|Stanisław Brzozowski and Tadeusz Boy-Żeleński criticised Libelt's ideological and messianism|messianic representation of a Polish republic, because it originated from the social traditionalism and the reactionary conservatism that pervaded Polish culture and impeded socio-economic progress.Boy-Żeleński, T. (1932) Nasi okupanci |Our Occupants. Consequent to the Imperial Prussian, Austrian, Swedish and Russian Partitions of Poland, the imposition of Tsarist cultural hegemony caused many of the political and cultural élites to participate in the Great Emigration (1831–70). = After the Invasion of Poland (1 September 1939), by Nazi Germany and the Soviet union, in occupied Poland each side proceeded to eliminate any possible resistance leader. In their part of occupied Poland, the Nazis began the Second World War (1939–45) with the extermination of the Polish intelligentsia, by way of the military operations of the Special Prosecution Book-Poland, the German AB-Aktion in Poland, the Intelligenzaktion, and the Intelligenzaktion Pommern. In their part of occupied Poland, the Soviet Union proceeded with the extermination of the Polish intelligentsia with operations such as the Katyn massacre (April-May 1940), during which university professors, physicians, lawyers, engineers, teachers, military, policeman, writers and journalists were murdered. ==Russia==  File:Vissarion Belinsky by K Gorbunov 1843.jpg|thumb|upright|Vissarion Belinsky The Russian "intelligentsiya" also was a mixture of messianism and intellectual élitism, which the philosopher Isaiah Berlin described as follows: "The phenomenon, itself, with its historical and literally revolutionary consequences, is, I suppose, the largest, single Russian contribution to social change in the world. The concept of intelligentsia must not be confused with the notion of intellectuals. Its members thought of themselves as united, by something more than mere interest in ideas; they conceived themselves as being a dedicated order, almost a secular priesthood, devoted to the spreading of a specific attitude to life."Berlin, Isaiah. "A Remarkable decade". Published in: "Russian Thinkers", Penguin UK, 2013, </ ...
