  Iran and the United States have had no formal diplomatic relations since April 7, 1980. Instead, Pakistan serves as Iran's protecting power in the United States, while Switzerland serves as the United States' protecting power in Iran. Contacts are carried out through the Interests Section of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the United States|Iranian Interests Section of the Embassy of Pakistan, Washington, D.C.|Pakistani Embassy in Washington, D.C., and the Embassy of the United States, Tehran|US Interests Section of the Swiss Embassy in Tehran., Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (page visited on 4 April 2015). In August 2018, Supreme Leader of Iran Ali Khamenei banned direct talks with the United States. Relations between the two nations began in the mid-to-late 19th century, when Iran was known to the west as Qajar Iran|Persia. Persia was very wary of British and Russian colonial interests during the Great Game. By contrast, the United States was seen as a more trustworthy foreign power, and the Americans Arthur Millspaugh and Morgan Shuster were even appointed treasurers-general by the Shahs of the time. During World War II, Persia was Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran|invaded by the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, both US allies, but relations continued to be positive after the war until the later years of the government of Mohammad Mosaddegh, who was overthrown by a 1953 Iranian coup d'état|coup organized by the Central Intelligence Agency and aided by MI6. This was followed by an era of very close alliance and friendship between Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi's regime and the US government, Persia being one of the US's closest allies,Jenkins, Philip (2006). "Decade of Nightmares: The End of the Sixties and the Making of Eighties America: The End of the Sixties and the Making of Eighties America" p. 153. Oxford University Press, US. Little, Douglas (2009). "American Orientalism: The United States and the Middle East since 1945". p. 145. Univ of North Carolina Press. Murray, Donette (2009). "US Foreign Policy and Iran: American–Iranian Relations Since the Islamic Revolution" p. 8. Routledge.  which was in turn followed by a dramatic reversal and disagreement between the two countries after the 1979 Iranian Revolution. Opinions differ as to the cause of the cooling in relations. Iranian explanations include everything from the natural and unavoidable conflict between the Islamic Revolution on the one hand, and perceived Global arrogance|American arrogance online.wsj.com April 1, 2009 and desire for global hegemony on the other. p. 20 <blockquote>It is natural that our Islamic system should be viewed as an enemy and an intolerable rival by such an oppressive power as the United States, which is trying to establish a global dictatorship and further its own interests by dominating other nations and trampling on their rights. It is also clear that the conflict and confrontation between the two is something natural and unavoidable. </blockquote>  Other explanations include the Iranian government's need for an external bogeyman to furnish a pretext for domestic repression against Iranian reform movement|pro-democratic forces and to bind the government to its loyal constituency."The New Republic", Charm Offensive, by Laura Secor, April 1, 2009 <blockquote>To give up this trump card—the non-relationship with the United States, the easy evocation of an external bogeyman—would be costly for the Iranian leadership. It would be a Gorbachevian signal that the revolution is entering a dramatically new phase—one Iran's leaders cannot be certain of surviving in power.</blockquote>  The United States attributes the worsening of relations to the 1979–81 Iran hostage crisis, Iran's repeated human rights in Iran|human rights abuses since the Islamic Revolution, its anti-Western ideology and its Nuclear program of Iran|nuclear program. Since 1995, the United States has had an embargo on trade with Iran. In 2015, the United States led successful negotiations for a nuclear deal (the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action) intended to place substantial limits on Iran's nuclear program, including more intrusive International Atomic Energy Agency|IAEA inspections as well as limitations on enrichment levels, and in 2016 most sanctions against Iran|sanctions on Iran were lifted.Akbar E. Torbat, Politics of Oil and Nuclear Technology in Iran, Palgrave MacMillan, 2020, The Trump administration unilaterally United States withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action|withdrew from the nuclear deal and re-imposed sanctions in 2018, initiating what became known as the "maximum pressure campaign" against Iran. In response, Iran began to gradually reduce its commitments under the nuclear deal and eventually exceeded pre-JCPOA enrichment levels. The two countries came close to open conflict during the 2019–2021 Persian Gulf crisis. According to a 2013 BBC World Service poll, 5% of Americans view Iranian influence positively, with 87% expressing a negative view, the most unfavorable perception of Iran in the world. On the other hand, research has shown that most Iranians hold a positive attitude about the American people, though not the US government.Shahghasemi, E., Heisey, D. R., & Mirani, G. (October 1, 2011). "How do Iranians and U.S. Citizens perceive each other: A systematic review." "Journal of Intercultural Communication", 27.Shahghasemi, E., & Heisey, D. R. (January 1, 2009). "The Cross-Cultural Schemata of Iranian-American People Toward Each Other: A Qualitative Approach." "Intercultural Communication Studies", 18, 1, 143–160. According to a 2019 survey by IranPoll, 13% of Iranians have a favorable view of the United States, with 86% expressing an unfavorable view, the most unfavorable perception of the United States in the world. According to a 2018 Pew poll, 39% of Americans say that limiting the power and influence of Iran should be a top foreign policy priority. Relations tend to improve when the two countries have overlapping goals, such as repelling Sunni militants during the Iraq War and the International military intervention against ISIL|intervention against ISIS.The Middle East and North Africa 2003, eur, 363, 2002  == Early relations == History of American newspapers#Colonial period|American newspapers in the 1720s were uniformly pro-Iranian, especially during the revolt of Afghan emir Mahmud Hotak () against the Safavid dynasty.  Political relations between Iran (Persia) and the United States began when the Shah of Iran, Nassereddin Shah Qajar, officially dispatched Iran's first ambassador, Mirza Abolhasan to Washington, D.C., in 1856."The Middle East and the United States: A Historical and Political Reassessment", David W. Lesch, 2003, , p. 52 In 1883, Samuel G. W. Benjamin was appointed by the United States as the first official diplomatic envoy to Iran; however, ambassadorial relations were not established until 1944. The first Iranian Ambassador to the United States of America was Mirza Albohassan Khan Ilchi Kabir. Justin Perkins and Asahel Grant were the first missionaries dispatched to Iran in 1834 via the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. The US had little interest in Persian affairs, while US as a trustworthy outsider did not suffer. The Persians again sought the US for help in straightening out its finances after World War I. This mission unlike the last was opposed by powerful vested interests and eventually it was withdrawn with its task incomplete. Following this there was no special US concern with Iran or any interaction until World War II. Amir Kabir, Prime Minister under Nasereddin Shah, also initiated direct contacts with the American government in Washington. By the end of the 19th century, negotiations were underway for an American company to establish a railway system from the Persian Gulf to Tehran. Until World War II, relations between Iran and the United States remained cordial. As a result, many Iranians sympathetic to the Persian Constitutional Revolution came to view the US as a "third force" in their struggle to expel British and Russian dominance in Persian affairs. American industrial and business leaders were supportive of Iran's drive to modernize its economy and to expel British and Russian influence from the country. <gallery class="center"> File:Arg-Tabriz-USA.jpg|The US Consulate at Arg e Tabriz sits in the line of fire during the Iranian Constitutional Revolution. While the city was being attacked and bombed by 4,000 Russian troops in December 1911, Howard Baskerville took to arms, helping the people of Iran. File:Americans wearing Persian clothes.jpg|Americans wearing "jobbeh va kolah" (traditional Persian clothes) at the opening of "The Majles", January 29, 1924. Mr. McCaskey, Dr. Arthur Millspaugh, and Colonel MacCormack are seen in the photo. File:Shuster-team.jpg|Morgan Shuster and US officials at Atabak Palace, Tehran, 1911. Their group was appointed by Majles|Iran's parliament to reform and modernize Iran's Department of Treasury and Finances. File:American College Tehran.JPG|McCormick Hall, Alborz High School|American College of Tehran, circa 1930, chartered by the State University of New York in 1932. Americans also founded Urmia University|Iran's first modern College of Medicine in the 1870s. File:Joseph Plumb Cochran.jpeg|Joseph Cochran|Joseph Plumb Cochran, American Presbyterian missionary. He is credited as the founder of Iran's first modern Medical School. File:Tabriz memorial highschool 00.jpg|American Memorial School in Tabriz, established in 1881 </gallery> During the Persian Constitutional Revolution in 1909, an American named Howard Baskerville died in Tabriz while fighting with a militia in a battle against royalist forces.{{Cite news|url=https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/201 ...
