  Image:Inside cover-Curiositez inouyes sur la sculpture talismanique des Persans.jpg|thumb|right|The inside cover of "Curiositez inouyes sur la sculpture talismanique des Persans, horoscope des Patriarches et lecture des estoiles". "Jacques Gaffarel" () (1601–1681) was a French scholar and Astrology|astrologer. He followed the family tradition of studying medicine, and then became a priest, but mainly developed his interests in the fields of natural history and Oriental occultism, gaining fluency in the Hebrew language|Hebrew, Persian language|Persian, and Arabic languages. His most famous work is "" ("Unheard-of Curiosities concerning Talismanical Sculpture of the Persians, the horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the reading of the Stars), which was published in French in 1629 (and translated into English in 1650, by Edmund Chilmead). Gaffarel included in his work two large folding plates of "the Celestial Constellations expressed by Hebrew characters", and asserted that the letters of the Hebrew alphabet could be interpreted from the constellations and that the heavens could be read as if a book. Image:Retraction-Curiositez inouyes sur la sculpture talismanique des Persans.jpg|thumb|right|The retraction written in the above-mentioned book. His book enjoyed phenomenal success. René Descartes read it with interest and the French physician and mathematician Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) defended it. "Unheard-of Curiosities" was one of 1,500 books in the Library of Sir Thomas Browne and one of the varied sources of his encyclopaedia entitled Pseudodoxia Epidemica. Browne alludes to Gaffarel's astrology in The Garden of Cyrus thus: :"Could we satisfy our selves in the position of the lights above, or discover the wisdom of that order so invariably maintained in the fixed stars of heaven......we might abate.....the strange Cryptography of Gaffarell in his Starrie Booke of Heaven." Gaffarel contributed to the debate between Marin Mersenne and Robert Fludd. On the other hand, the University of Paris|Sorbonne rejected Gaffarel's work and ridiculed him; however, he gained the protection of the powerful Cardinal Richelieu, who made him his librarian and sent him off first to Italy, then to Greece and Asia to retrieve rare books (reportedly including manuscripts by Pico della Mirandola). == References ==  ==External links==  * Examples of Gaffarel's astrological writing **  **  *  ==Bibliography== Hiro Hirai (ed.), "Jacques Gaffarel between Magic and Science" (Rome: Serra, 2014).  Saverio Campanini, "Eine späte Apologie der Kabbala. Die Abdita divinae Cabalae Mysteria des Jacques Gaffarel", in T. Frank – U. Kocher – U. Tarnow (edd.), "Topik und Tradition. Prozesse der Neuordnung von Wissensüberlieferungen des 13. bis 17. Jahrhunderts", Göttingen 2007, pp.&nbsp;325–351.   Category:1601 births Category:1681 deaths Category:Christian Hebraists Category:French astrologers Category:17th-century astrologers Category:French librarians
