   |birth_place = Lusk, Wyoming|Lusk, Wyoming, U.S. |death_date  =  |death_place =  |party       = Republican Party (United States)|Republican |education   = University of Wyoming  }} "James Gaius Watt" (born January 31, 1938) is a public servant who served as U.S. Secretary of the Interior from 1981 to 1983. He has been described as "anti-environmentalist", and was one of Ronald Reagan's most controversial Cabinet of the United States|cabinet appointments. Watt's pro-development views played an instrumental role in ending the Sagebrush Rebellion. ==Early life and career== Watt was born in Lusk, Wyoming, the son of Lois Mae (née Williams) and William Gaius Watt.  He attended the University of Wyoming, earning a bachelor's degree in 1960 and a juris doctor degree in 1962. Watt's first political job was as an aide to United States Republican Party|Republican Party Senator Milward L. Simpson of Wyoming, whom he met through Simpson's son, Alan K. Simpson|Alan. A lifelong Republican Party (United States)|Republican, he served as Secretary to the Right-wing politics|right-leaning Natural Resources Committee and Environmental Pollution Advisory Panel of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. In 1969, Watt was appointed the deputy assistant secretary of water and power development at the Department of the Interior. In 1975, Watt was appointed vice chairman of the Federal Power Commission. In 1977, Watt became the first president and chief legal officer of Mountain States Legal Foundation, a public interest law firm "dedicated to individual liberty, the right to own and use property, limited and ethical government and economic freedom." A number of attorneys who worked for Watt at the firm later became high-ranking officers of the federal government, including Ann Veneman and Gale Norton. ==Secretary of the Interior== In 1980, President-elect Reagan nominated Watt as his Secretary of the Interior. The United States Senate subsequently confirmed the nomination. His tenure as Secretary of the Interior was controversial, primarily because he was perceived as being hostile to environmentalism, and endorsed development of federal lands by forestry|foresting and ranching, and for other commercial interests. According to the Center for Biological Diversity, Watt had the record, among those who served as Secretary of the Interior, of listing the fewest species protected under the Endangered Species Act. The record was later surpassed by Dirk Kempthorne, a George W. Bush appointee who, as of August 27, 2007 , had not listed a single species in the 15-month period since his confirmation.  Greg Wetstone, the chief environment counsel at the House Energy and Commerce Committee during the Reagan administration, who subsequently served as director of advocacy at the Natural Resources Defense Council, argued that Watt was one of the two most "intensely controversial and blatantly anti-environmental political appointees" in American history. The other was Anne Gorsuch, director of the United States Environmental Protection Agency|EPA at the time. Environmental groups accused Watt of reducing funding for environmental programs, restructuring the department to decrease federal regulatory power, wanting to eliminate the Land and Water Conservation Fund which aimed at increasing the area of wildlife refuges and other protected land, easing regulations of oil and mining, directing the National Park Service to draft rules that would de-authorize congressionally authorized national parks,  and recommending lease of wilderness and shore lands such as Santa Monica Bay to explore and develop oil and gas. Watt resisted accepting donation of private land to be used for conservation ethic|conservation. "Time" October 24, 1983 He suggested that 80 million acres (320,000&nbsp;km²) of undeveloped land in the United States all be opened for drilling and mining by 2000. The area leased to coal mining quintupled during his term as Secretary of the Interior. Watt boasted that he leased "a billion acres" (4 million km²) of coastal waters, even though only a small portion of that area would ever be drilled.  Watt once stated, "We will mine more, drill more, cut more timber."  Watt periodically mentioned his Dispensationalism|Dispensationalist Christian faith when discussing his method of environmental management. Speaking before Congress, he once said, "I do not know how many future generations we can count on before the Second Coming|Lord returns, whatever it is we have to manage with a skill to leave the resources needed for future generations." One apocryphal quotation falsely attributed to Watt is: "After the last tree is felled, Christ will come back." Glenn Scherer, writing for Grist Magazine|"Grist" magazine, erroneously attributed this remark to 1981 testimony by Watt before Congress. Journalist Bill Moyers, relying on the "Grist" article, also attributed the comment to Watt. After it was discovered that the alleged quotation did not exist, "Grist" corrected the error, and Moyers apologized.  "I never said it. Never believed it. Never even thought it," Watt later wrote of the statement. "I know no Christian who believes or preaches such error. The Bible commands conservation — that we as Christians be careful stewards of the land and resources entrusted to us by the Creator."  From 1980 through 1982, The Beach Boys and The Grass Roots separately performed at Independence Day (United States)|Independence Day concerts at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., attracting large crowds."July 4: Day of Music, Parades, Fireworks", "The Washington Post", Washington, D.C., July 3, 1982, p. D1.Phil McCombs, "Watt Outlaws Rock Music on Mall for July 4", "The Washington Post", Washington, D.C., April 6, 1983, p. A1; Phil McCombs and Richard Harrington, "Watt Sets Off Uproar with Music Ban", "The Washington Post", Washington, D.C., April 7, 1983, pp. A1, A17. In April 1983, Watt banned the concerts, on the grounds that "rock bands" who had performed on the Mall on Independence Day in 1981 and 1982 had encouraged drug use and alcoholism, and had attracted "the wrong element", who would subsequently rob attendees of similar events. Watt then announced that Las Vegas Valley|Las Vegas singer Wayne Newton, a friend and an endorser of President Reagan and a contributor to the Republican Party, would perform at the Independence Day celebration at the mall in 1983.   "in" website of   by Polity Media, Inc. Retrieved January 29, 2010. During the ensuing controversy, Rob Grill, lead singer of The Grass Roots, stated that he felt "highly insulted" by Watt's remarks, which he termed "nothing but un-American." The Beach Boys stated that the Soviet Union, which had invited them to perform in Leningrad in 1978, "obviously... did not feel the group attracted the wrong element." Vice President George H. W. Bush said of The Beach Boys, "They're my friends, and I like their music." Watt apologized to The Beach Boys after learning that President Reagan and First Lady of the United States|First Lady Nancy Reagan were fans of the band. "in" . Retrieved February 18, 2010. Nancy Reagan apologized for Watt.  "in" website of   by Yuddy, LLC. © and TM Yuddy, LLC. Retrieved January 29, 2010. The White House staff gave Watt a plaster foot with a hole for his "having shot himself in the foot.","in" . Retrieved February 18, 2010. "The Tonight Show" host Johnny Carson poked fun at Watt's last name, saying, "James What? What?"  "Mad (magazine)|Mad" magazine listed ten Watt controversies on the back cover of their October 1982 issue, under the title "Watt... We Worry!"; the list noted, among other quotes and actions, Watt's statement that "the Department of the Interior ... must be ... the Amicus curiae|Amicus for the minerals industry ... in Federal Policy." In an interview with the Satellite Program Network, Watt said, "If you want an example of the failure of socialism, don't go to Russia, come to America and go to the Indian reservations.", "The New York Times", January 19, 1983. Retrieved on May 29, 2010.  A controversy erupted after a speech to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in September 1983, when Watt mocked affirmative action with his description of a department coal leasing panel: "I have a black, a woman, two Jews and a cripple. And we have talent."{{cite web|url=http://bartleby.com/63/56/556.html |title=556. James G Watt, US Secretary of the Interior. Simpson's Contemporary Quotations. 1988 |access-date=October 4, 2012 |url-status=bot: unknown |archive-url=https://web.ar ...
