   File:Kairos-Relief von Lysippos, Kopie in Trogir.jpg|thumb|Kairos relief, copy of Lysippos, in Trogir (Croatia) File:Francesco Salviati 005.jpg|thumb|Kairos as portrayed in a 16th-century fresco by Francesco de' Rossi (Il Salviati)|Francesco Salviati "Kairos" () is an ancient Greek language|Greek word meaning 'the right, critical, or opportune moment'.Liddell and Scott, Greek-English Lexicon. In modern Greek, "kairos" also means 'weather' or 'time'. It is one of two words that the ancient Greeks had for 'time'; the other being  (). Whereas the latter refers to chronology|chronological or sequential time, Definition 2, in particular, references chronological time - dates and years. For example, the reference to Thucydides translates to "but he is somewhat concise and not accurate in his dates." Where "in his dates" is "τοῖς χρόνοις."  "kairos" signifies a proper or opportune time for action. In this sense, while  is quantitative, "kairos" has a qualitative, permanent nature. The plural,  () means 'the times'. Kairos is a term, idea, and practice that has been applied in several fields including classical rhetoric, modern rhetoric, digital media, Christian theology, and science. ==Origins== In Richard Broxton Onians|Onians's 1951 etymological studies of the word, he traces the primary root back to the Ancient Greece|ancient Greek association with both archery and weaving. In archery, "kairos" denotes the moment in which an arrow may be shot with sufficient force to penetrate a target. In weaving, "kairos" denotes the moment in which the Shuttle (weaving)|shuttle could be passed through threads on the loom.Stephenson, Hunter W. (2005) "Forecasting Opportunity: Kairos, Production, and Writing, p.4. University Press of America: Oxford Similarly, in his "Kaironomia", E.C. White defines "kairos" as the "long, tunnel-like aperture through which the archer's arrow has to pass," and as the moment "when the weaver must draw the yarn through a gap that momentarily opens in the warp of the cloth being woven." Both are examples of a decisive act predicated on precision. In the literature of the Classical Literature|classical period, writers and orators used "kairos" to specify moments when the opportune action was made, often through Metaphor|metaphors involving archery and one's ability to aim and shoot at the exact right time on-target. For example, in "The Suppliants (Euripides)|The Suppliants", a drama written by Euripides, Adrastus describes the ability to influence and change another person's mind by "aiming their bow beyond the kairos." Kairos in general was formulated as a tool to explain and understand the interposition of humans for their actions and the due consequences. "Kairos" is also an alternate spelling of the minor Greek deity Caerus, the god of luck and opportunity. ==In classical rhetoric== In rhetoric, "kairos" is "a passing instant when an opening appears which must be driven through with force if success is to be achieved."E. C. White, "Kaironomia" p. 13 Kairos, then, means that one must find the best situation, taking timing into consideration, to act. Kairos was central to the Sophists, who stressed the rhetor's ability to adapt to and take advantage of changing and contingent circumstances. In "Panathenaicus", Isocrates writes that educated people are those "who manage well the circumstances which they encounter day by day, and who possess a judgment which is accurate in meeting occasions as they arise and rarely misses the expedient course of action." Kairos is also very important in Aristotle's scheme of rhetoric. Kairos is, for Aristotle, the time and space context in which the Proof (truth)|proof will be delivered. Kairos stands alongside other contextual elements of rhetoric: "The Audience", which is the psychological and emotional makeup of those who will receive the proof; and "To Prepon", which is the style with which the orator clothes the proof. In Ancient Greece, kairos was utilized by both of the two main schools of thought in the field of rhetoric, focusing specifically on how kairos applies to speeches. The competing schools were those of the Sophists and their opposition, led by individuals such as Aristotle and Plato. Sophism approached rhetoric as an art form. Members of the school would travel around Greece teaching citizens about the art of rhetoric and successful discourse. In his article "Toward a Sophistic Definition of Rhetoric", John Poulakos defines rhetoric from a Sophistic perspective as follows: "Rhetoric is the art which seeks to capture in opportune moments that which is appropriate and attempts to suggest that which is possible." Aristotle and Plato, on the other hand, viewed Sophistic rhetoric as a tool used to manipulate others, and criticized those who taught it.    Kairos fits into the Sophistic scheme of rhetoric in conjunction with the ideas of prepon and dynaton. These two terms combined with kairos are their keys to successful rhetoric. As stated by Poulakos, Prepon deals with the notion that "what is said must conform to both audience and occasion." Dynaton has to do with the idea of the possible, or what the speaker is attempting to convince the audience of. Kairos in the Sophistic context is based on the thought that speech must happen at a certain time in order for it to be most effective. If rhetoric is to be meaningful and successful, it must be presented at the right moment, or else it will not have the same impact on the members of the audience.    Aristotle and his followers also discuss the importance of kairos in their teachings. In his "Rhetoric", one of the ways that Aristotle uses the idea of kairos is in reference to the specificity of each rhetorical situation. Aristotle believed that each rhetorical situation was different, and therefore different rhetorical devices needed to be applied at that point in time. One of the most well known parts of Aristotle's "Rhetoric" is when he discusses the roles of pathos, ethos, and logos. Aristotle ties kairos to these concepts, claiming that there are times in each rhetorical situation when one needs to be utilized over the others. Kairos has classically been defined as a concept that focused on "the uniquely timely, the spontaneous, the radically particular."  Ancient Pythagoreans thought Kairos to be one of the most fundamental laws of the universe.  Kairos was said to piece together the dualistic ways of the entire universe.  Empedocles was the philosopher who connected kairos to the principle of opposites and harmony.  It then became the principle of conflict and resolution and was thus inserted as a concept for rhetoric. ==Modern rhetorical definition== Aaron Hess (2011) submits a definition of "kairos" for the present day that bridges the two classical applications: Hess addresses Poulakos' view that, "In short, "kairos" dictates that what is said, must be said at the right time." He also suggests that in addition to timeliness, "kairos" considers appropriateness. According to Hess, "kairos" can either be understood as, "the decorum or propriety of any given moment and speech act, implying a reliance on the given or known", or as "the opportune, spontaneous, or timely." Although these two ideas of "kairos" might seem conflicting, Hess says that they offer a more extensive understanding of the term. Furthermore, they encourage creativity, which is necessary to adapt to unforeseen obstacles and opinions that can alter the opportune or appropriate moment, i.e. "kairos". Being able to recognize the propriety of a situation while having the ability to adapt one's rhetoric allows taking advantage of "kairos" to be successful. Hess's updated definition of "kairos" concludes that along with taking advantage of the timeliness and appropriateness of a situation, the term also implies being knowledgeable of and involved in the environment where the situation is taking place in order to benefit fully from seizing the opportune moment.   Hess' conflicting perspective on "kairos" is exemplified by the disagreement between Lloyd Bitzer (1968) and Richard Vatz (1983) about the 'rhetorical situation'. Bitzer argues that 'rhetorical situations' exist independent of human perspective; a situation invites discourse. He discusses the feeling of a missed opportunity ("kairos") to speak and the tendency to L'esprit de l'escalier |create a later speech in response to that unseized moment. However, Vatz counters Bitzer's view by claiming that a situation is made rhetorical by the perception of its interpreter and the way which they choose to respond to it, whether with discourse or not. It is the rhetor's responsibility to give an event meaning through linguistic depiction. Both Bitzer's and Vatz' perspectives add depth to Hess' ideas that "kairos" is concerned with both timeliness and appropriateness. On one hand, Bitzer's argument supports Hess' claim that "kairos" is spontaneous, and one must be able to recognize the situation as opportune in order to take advantage of it. On the other hand, Vatz' idea that the rhetor is responsible reinforces Hess' suggestion of the need to be knowledgeable and involved in the surrounding environment in order to fully profit from the situation. According to Bitzer, "kairos" is composed of exigence, audience, and constraints. Exigence is the inherent pressure to do something about a situation immediately, with the action required depending on the situation. The audience are the listeners who the rhetor is attempting to persuade. Constraints are the external factors that challenges the rhetors ability to influence, such as the audience's personal beliefs and motivations. Additionally, factors such as cultural background, previous social experiences, and current mood, can influence the capacity to see and understand the correct and opportune moment of action. Thus, the difficulty of using "kairos" in a modern rhetorical setting is understanding and working within its constraints, while also carefully considering unexpected situations and encounters that arise, in order to present one's rhetorical argument as naturally as possible. Definitions of "kairos" using modern English are inherently vague: There is no one word in today's English language that succinctly encompasses the meaning of "kairos" (similar to "ethos", "logos", and "pathos"). Michael Harker (2007) says, "Like the 'points' on the rhetorical triangle, the meaning of "kairos" is not definitive but rather a starting point for grasping the whole of an argument." The inclusion of "kairos" in modern composition has not been implicitly made, but there are undertones. Various components of "kairos" are included in modern composition and have made profound effects on modern composition theory. The purpose of "kairos" in modern rhetoric is mostly focused on the placement of logos, pathos, and ethos. It is used as a "starting point" in modern rhetoric. Kelly Pender (2003) states the inclusion of "kairos" within discourse "would try to shift the focus of personal writing from the writer's experiences and emotions to a broader perspective that explicitly concentr ...
