  "Kṣitigarbha" (, ,  Wylie transliteration|Wylie: "sa yi snying po") is a bodhisattva primarily revered in East Asian Buddhism and usually depicted as a Bhikkhu|Buddhist monk. His name may be translated as "Earth Treasury", "Earth Store", "Earth Matrix", or "Earth Womb".  Kṣitigarbha is known for his vow to take responsibility for the instruction of all beings in the Desire realm|six worlds between the death of Gautama Buddha and the rise of Maitreya, as well as his vow not to achieve Buddhahood until all Naraka (Buddhism)|hells are emptied. He is therefore often regarded as the bodhisattva of hell-beings, as well as the guardian of children and patron deity of deceased children and aborted fetuses in Japanese culture. Usually depicted as a monk with a Halo (religious iconography)|halo around his shaved head, he carries a khakkhara|staff to force open the gates of hell and a Cintamani|wish-fulfilling jewel to light up the darkness. == Overview == Kṣitigarbha is one of the four principal bodhisattvas in East Asian Mahayana|Mahayana Buddhism. The others are Samantabhadra (Bodhisattva)|Samantabhadra, Manjusri, and Avalokiteśvara. At the pre-Tang dynasty grottos in Dunhuang and Longmen Grottoes|Longmen, he is depicted in a classical bodhisattva form. After the Tang, he became increasingly depicted as a monk carrying Buddhist prayer beads and a staff. His full name in Chinese is "Dayuan Dizang Pusa" (), or "Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva of the Great Vow," pronounced "Daigan Jizō Bosatsu" in Japanese, "Jijang Bosal" in Korean, "Đại Nguyện Địa Tạng Vương Bồ Tát" in Vietnamese. This name is a reference to his pledge, as recorded in the sutras, to take responsibility for the instruction of all beings in the Desire realm|six worlds in the era between the parinirvana of the Buddha and the rise of Maitreya. Because of this important role, shrines to Kṣitigarbha often occupy a central role in temples, especially within the memorial halls or mausoleums. == Sources ==  The story of Kṣitigarbha was first described in the "Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva Pūrvapraṇidhāna Sūtra", one of the most popular Mahayana sutras. This sutra is said to have been spoken by the Buddha towards the end of his life to the beings of the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven as a mark of gratitude and remembrance for his beloved mother, Maya (mother of the Buddha)|Maya. The "Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva Pūrvapraṇidhāna Sūtra" begins, "Thus have I heard. Once the Buddha was abiding in Trayastrimsas Heaven in order to expound the Dharma to his mother." The "Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva Pūrvapraṇidhāna Sūtra" was first translated from Sanskrit into Chinese between 695 and 700 CE, during the Tang dynasty, by the Tripiṭaka master Śikṣānanda, a Buddhist monk from Hotan|Khotan who also provided a new translation of the "Avatamsaka Sutra|Avataṃsaka Sūtra" and the "Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra". However, some scholars have suspected that instead of being translated, this text may have originated in China, since no Sanskrit manuscripts of this text have been found. Part of the reason for suspicion is that the text advocates filial piety in Buddhism|filial piety, which was stereotypically associated with Chinese culture. It stated that Kṣitigarbha practised filial piety as a mortal, which eventually led to making great vows to save all sentient beings. Since then, other scholars such as Gregory Schopen have pointed out that Indian Buddhism also had traditions of filial piety.Schopen, Gregory. "Filial Piety and the Monk in the Practice of Buddhism: A Question of 'Sinicization' Viewed from the Other Side." Currently there is no definitive evidence indicating either an Indian or Chinese origin for the text. In the "Kṣitigarbha Sūtra", the Buddha states that in the distant past eons, Kṣitigarbha was a maiden of the Brahmin caste by the name of "Sacred Girl".Frederic, Louis. "Buddhism: Flammarion Iconographic Guides." 1995. pp. 184-185Edkins, Joseph. "Chinese Buddhism." 2003. pp. 225-226 This maiden was deeply troubled upon the death of her mother - who had often been slanderous towards the Three Jewels. To save her mother from the great tortures of hell, the girl sold whatever she had and used the money to buy offerings that she offered daily to the Buddha of her time, known as the Buddha of the Flower of Meditation and Enlightenment. She prayed fervently that her mother be spared the pains of hell and appealed to the Buddha for help. While she was pleading for help at the temple, she heard the Buddha telling her to go home, sit down, and recite his name if she wanted to know where her mother was. She did as she was told and her consciousness was transported to a Hell realm, where she met a guardian who informed her that through her fervent prayers and pious offerings, her mother had accumulated much Merit (Buddhism)|merit and had already ascended to heaven. Sacred Girl was greatly relieved and would have been extremely happy, but the sight of the suffering she had seen in Hell touched her heart. She vowed to do her best to relieve beings of their suffering in her future lives for kalpa (aeon)|kalpas.  File:Goryeo-Kshitigarbha (Chijang)-late.14c.jpg|thumb|Kṣitigarbha painting, Goryeo, late 14th century There is a legend about how Kṣitigarbha manifested himself in China and chose his bodhimaṇḍa to be Mount Jiuhua, one of the Sacred Mountains of China|Four Sacred Mountains of China. During the reign of Emperor Ming of Han, Buddhism started to flourish, reaching its peak in the Tang and eventually spreading to Korea. At the time, monks and scholars arrived from those countries to seek the dharma in China. One of these pilgrims was a former prince from Silla named Kim Gyo-gak, who became a monk under the Chinese name Dizang "Kṣitigarbha," pronounced "Jijang" in Korean. He went to Mount Jiuhua in present-day Anhui. After ascending, he decided to build a hut in a deep mountain area so that he could cultivate the dharma. According to records, Jijang was bitten by a poisonous snake but he did not move, thus letting the snake go. A woman happened to pass by and gave the monk medicines to cure him of the venom, as well as a spring on her son's behalf. For a few years, Jijang continued to meditate in his hut, until one day, a scholar named Chu-Ke led a group of friends and family to visit the mountain. Noticing the monk meditating in the hut, they went and took a look at his condition. They had noticed that his bowl did not contain any food, and that his hair had grown back. Taking pity on the monk, Chu-Ke decided to build a temple as an offering to him. The whole group descended the mountain immediately to discuss plans to build the temple. Mount Jiuhua was also property of a wealthy person called Elder Wen-Ke, who obliged to build a temple on his mountain. Therefore, Wen-Ke and the group ascended the mountain once more and asked Jijang how much land he needed. Jijang replied that he needed a piece of land that could be covered fully by his Kasaya (clothing)|kasaya. Initially believing that a piece of sash could not provide enough land to build a temple, they were surprised when Jijang threw the kasaya in the air, and the robe expanded in size, covering the entire mountain. Elder Wen-Ke had then decided to renounce the entire mountain to Jijang, and became his protector. Sometime later, Wen-Ke's son also left secular life to become a monk. Jijang lived in Mount Jiuhua for 75 years before passing away at the age of 99. Three years after his nirvana, his tomb was opened, only to reveal that the body incorruptibility|had not decayed. Because Jijang led his wayplace with much difficulty, most people had the intuition to believe that he was indeed an incarnation of Kṣitigarbha. Jijang's well-preserved, dehydrated body may still be viewed today at the monastery he built on Mount Jiuhua. == Iconography == File:Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva Wood Statue.jpeg|thumb|200px|right|<!--Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva statue-->Depicted with a crown, staff, and jewel (cintamani). Fo Guang Shan Buddhist Temple, London.  In Buddhist iconography, Kṣitigarbha is typically depicted with a shaven head, dressed in a monk's simple robes (unlike most other bodhisattvas, who are dressed like Indian royalty). In his left hand, Kṣitigarbha holds a tear-shaped jewel or cintamani (Chinese language|Chinese: 如意寶珠; Pinyin: "Rúyì bǎozhū"; Romanization of Japanese|Romaji: "Nyoihōju") in his right hand, he holds a Khakkhara (Chinese language|Chinese: 錫杖; Pinyin: "Xīzhàng"; Romanization of Japanese|Rōmaji: "Shakujō"), which is used to alert insects and small animals of his approach, so that he will not accidentally harm them. This staff is traditionally carried by Buddhist monks. Like other bodhisattvas, Kṣitigarbha usually is seen standing on a lotus base, symbolizing his release from Rebirth (Buddhism)|rebirth. Kṣitigarbha's face and head are also idealised, featuring the third eye, elongated ears and the other standard attributes of a Buddhahood|buddha. In the Chinese tradition, Kṣitigarbha is sometimes depicted wearing a crown like the one worn by Vairocana. His image is similar to that of the fictional character Tang Sanzang from the classical novel "Journey to the West", so observers sometimes mistake Kṣitigarbha for the latter. In China, Kṣitigarbha is also sometimes accompanied by a dog. This is in reference to a legend that he found his mother reborn in the animal realm as a dog named Diting, which the Bodhisattva adopted to serve as his steed and guard. In Japan, Kṣitigarbha's statues are often adorned with bibs, kerchiefs or Kasa (hat)|kasa hat on his head, and sometimes dressed with a haori. Tōsen-ji in Katsushika, Tokyo, contains the "Bound Kṣitigarbha" of Ōoka Tadasuke fame, dating from the Edo period. When petitions are requested before Kṣitigarbha, the petitioner ties a rope about the statue. When the wish is granted, the petitioner unties the rope. At the new year, the ropes of the ungranted wishes are cut by the temple priest.  File:Kṣitigarbha as Lord of the Six Ways (Stein Painting 19).jpg|thumb|left|Painting of Kṣitigarbha as the Lord of the Six Ways from Mogao Grottoes in Dunhuang Another category of iconographic depiction is Kṣitigarbha as the Lord of the Six Ways, an allegorical representation of the Saṃsāra (Buddhism)|Six Paths of Rebirth of the Desire realm (rebirth into hell, or as pretas, animals, asuras, men, and devas). The Six Paths are often depicted as six rays or beams radiating from the bodhisattva and accompanied by figurative representations of the Six Paths. Many of these depictions in China can be found in Shaanxi province, perhaps a result of Sanjiejiao teachings in the area. A Japanese variation of this depiction is the Six Kṣitigarbhas, six full sculptural manifestations of the bodhisattva. An example of this can be found in Konjikidō, the ‘Hall of Gold,’ in the Chūson-ji temple. ==In Buddhist traditions==  Mount Jiuhua in Anhui is regarded as Kṣitigarbha's bodhimaṇḍa. It is one of the Four Sacred Buddhism Mountains in China, and at one time housed more than 300 temples. Today, 95 of these are open to the public. The mountain is a popular destination for pilgrims offering dedications to Kṣitigarbha. In certain Chinese Buddhist legends, the arhat Maudgalyayana, known in Chinese as "Mùlián" (目連), acts as an assistant to Ksitigarbha in his vow to save the denizens of hell. As a result, Mùlián is usually also venerated in temples that enshrine Ksitigarbha. In folk beliefs, the mount of Ksitigarbha, Diting, is a divine beast that can distinguish good from evil, virtuous and foolish. In iconographic form, it is often enshrined at the side of Ksitigarbha, or portrayed with Ksitigarbha riding on its back as a mount. In some areas, the admixture of traditional religions has led to Kṣitigarbha being also regarded as a deity in Taoism and Chinese folk religion. :zh:地藏庵|Kṣitigarbha Temples (Chinese language|Chinese: 地藏庵; Pinyin: "Dìzàng'ān") are Taoist temples that usually enshrine Kṣitigarbha as the main deity, along with other gods typically related to the Chinese netherworld Diyu, such as Yanluo Wang and Heibai Wuchang. Believers usually visit these temples to pray for the blessings of the ancestors and the souls of the dead.{{Cite web|title=全省地藏廟|url=ht ...
