   1900 |population=1,213 |popplace= United States (Washington (state)|Washington) |rels= |langs=English language|English, Makah language|Makah (survives as a second language) |related=Nuu-chah-nulth, Ditidaht }} The "Makah" (; Klallam language|Klallam: "màq̓áʔa")Renker, Ann M., and Gunther, Erna (1990). "Makah". In "Northwest Coast", ed. Wayne Suttles. Vol. 7 of "Handbook of North American Indians", ed. William C. Sturtevant. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, pg. 429 are an Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast|indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest Coast living in Washington (state)|Washington, in the northwestern part of the continental United States. They are enrolled in the Federally recognized tribe|federally recognized "Makah Indian Tribe of the Makah Indian Reservation". Linguistically and ethnographically, they are closely related to the Nuu-chah-nulth and Ditidaht peoples of the Vancouver Island|West Coast of Vancouver Island, who live across the Strait of Juan de Fuca in British Columbia, Canada. ==Reservation== The Makah Indian Tribe owns the Makah Indian Reservation on the northwest tip of the Olympic Peninsula; it includes Tatoosh Island, Washington|Tatoosh Island. They live in and around the town of Neah Bay, Washington, a small fishing village. The Makah people endonym|refer to themselves as "Kwih-dich-chuh-ahtx" ("") which translates to somewhere near to "the people who live by the rocks and seagulls". Other thought translations include  "the people who live on the cape by the seagulls", and "people of the point", as well as several others. Makah was exonym|a name given to them by others and means "generous with food".Makah Cultural and Research Center online museum:  and  == History ==  Archaeological research suggests that Makah people have inhabited the area now known as Neah Bay for more than 3,800 years. Ancient Makah lived in villages, inhabiting large longhouses made from western red cedar. These longhouses had cedar-plank walls. The planks could be tilted or removed to provide ventilation or light. The Thuja plicata|cedar tree was of great value to Makah, who also used its bark to make water-resistant clothing and hats. Cedar roots were used in basket making. Whole trees were carved out to make canoes to hunt Pinniped|seals, gray whales and humpback whales. Makah acquired much of their food from the ocean. Their diet consisted of whale, seal, fish, and a wide variety of shellfish. They would also hunt deer, elk, and bear from the surrounding forests. Women also gathered a wide variety of nuts, berries and edible plants and roots for their foods. Much of what is known about the way of life of ancient Makah is derived from their oral tradition. Abundant archeology|archeological evidence excavated at the Ozette village site (see below) has provided great insight into the lives of Makah.   In the early 17th century, a mudslide engulfed part of a Makah village near Lake Ozette. The mudslide preserved several houses and their contents in a collapsed state until the 1970s, when they were excavated by Makahs and archaeologists from Washington State University. Over 55,000 artifacts were recovered, representing many activities of the Makah, from whale and seal hunting to salmon and halibut fishing. Artifacts included toys, games, and bows and arrows. The oral history of the Makah mentions a "great slide" which engulfed a portion of Ozette long ago. Archaeological test pits were excavated at the Ozette site in 1966 and 1967 by Richard Daugherty. , Palomar College However, it was not until 1970 that it became apparent what was buried there. After a storm in February 1970, tidal erosion exposed hundreds of well-preserved wooden artifacts. The excavation of the Ozette site began shortly after. University students worked with the Makah under the direction of archaeologists using pressurized water to remove mud from six buried long houses. The excavation went on for 11 years. It produced more than 55,000 artifacts, many of which are on display in the . Opened in 1979, the museum displays replicas of cedar long houses as well as whaling, fishing, and sealing canoes.Steury, Tim. , "Washington State Magazine."  In 1834, a dismasted, rudderless ship from Japan ran aground near Cape Flattery.  The Makah took the three survivors of the broken ship and held them as slaves for several months before taking them to Fort Vancouver. From there, the United States transported them by ship to London and eventually China, but they never reached Japan again.  File:MakahIndians.jpg|thumb|right|299px|A Makah settlement, c. 1900 On January 31, 1855, the select Makah tribe representatives signed the Treaty of Neah Bay with the Federal government of the United States|U.S. federal government, ceding much of their traditional lands. The treaty required the Makah lands to be restricted to the Makah Reservation (at  in Clallam County) and preserved the Makah people's rights to hunt whales and seals in the region. The Makah language was not used during the negotiation of the treaty, and the government used the Salishan languages|Salish name for the tribe. "Makah" is an incorrect pronunciation of a Salish term meaning "generous with food". ==Contemporary culture== In 1936, the Makah Tribe signed the Makah Constitution, accepting the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 and establishing an elected tribal government. The constitution provided for a five-member Tribal Council. Each year the council elects a Tribal Chairperson. The Council develops and passes laws for the Makah Reservation. Tribal census data from 1999 show that the Makah Tribe has 1,214 enrolled members; some 1,079 live on the reservation. The unemployment rate on the reservation is approximately 51%. The Makah tribe hosts its annual major public gathering, , in late August. It features a grand parade and street fair as well as canoe races, traditional games, singing, dancing, feasting, and fireworks. Many Makah tribal members derive most of their income from fishing. Makah fish for Pacific salmon|salmon, Pacific halibut|halibut, Pacific whiting, and other marine fish. This makes them particularly vulnerable to effects of global warming: ocean acidification disrupts the development of the shells of molluscs (the fishes' main food source) and warming waters the salmon run. In response, the Makah tribe is drawing on traditional knowledge to create action plans for climate resilience that center tribal socioeconomic priorities. With the Hoh, Quileute, and Quinault Indian Nation, as well as the scientific community, the Makah conduct climate research at and monitor the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary. Historically, the structure of Makah society is a class system; people in the middle or lower classes could gain better social status by marrying into the upper levels. The community was in mostly a cognatic kinship|cognatic descent structure. The Makah traditional family consisted of parents and children living in a particular area. Members of Makah families were ranked in society according to their relationship to the chief of the tribe. There were no stratifications in gender roles; all genders were equal, participating in the hunting of whales and other livestock. Although men were more fishermen and hunters, women's activities centered on gathering resources for the family.  Makah women chew the roots and leaves of "Viola adunca" while giving birth.Gunther, Erna, 1973, Ethnobotany of Western Washington, Seattle. University of Washington Press. Revised edition, page 40 ==Language==   The Makah language is the Indigenous languages of the Americas|indigenous language spoken by the Makah people. Makah has been extinct as a first language since 2002, when its last fluent native speaker died. However, it survives as a second language. The Makah tribe is working to revive the language, and has established preschool classes to teach its children. The  endonymous name for Makah is qʷi·qʷi·diččaq.Davidson, Matthew (2002). . Ph.D. dissertation, SUNY Buffalo, p. 349 The Makah tribe linguistically belongs to the Southern Nootkan branch of the Wakashan languages|Wakashan family of languages among North American indigenous peoples. The Makah language, also known as qʷi·qʷi·diččaq (qwiqwidicciat) is the only Wakashan language in the United States. Other tribes speaking Wakashan are located in British Columbia, Canada, immediately across the Strait of Juan de Fuca on the west coast of Vancouver Island, and northwards as far as that province's British Columbia Coast|Central Coast region. ==Whaling== <!-- Deleted image removed: File:Makah Gray Whale sm.jpg|thumb|right|299px|Skeleton of the gray whale harvested in 1999 by the Makah tribe. Articulated by Skulls Unlimited International. --> Makah oral history relates that their tradition of aboriginal whaling has been suspended and re-established several times. Most recently, the practice was suspended in the 1920s because the commercial whaling industry had depleted the stocks of Humpback whale|humpback and gray whales; all hunting was called off. After the gray whale was removed from the List of endangered species in the US|Endangered Species List, the Makah re-asserted their whaling rights. With the support and guidance of the United States government and the International Whaling Commission, the Makah successfully hunted a gray whale on May 17, 1999. According to federal law, the Makah are entitled to hunt and kill one baleen whale, typically a gray whale, each year. Archaeological records and oral history indicate a significant number of humpback whales were historically hunted as well. The Makah had gone over 70 years without catching a whale. File:The King of the Seas in the Hands of the Makahs - 1910.jpg|thumb|right|299px|Makah whalers, c. 1910 File:Indian Whalers Stripping Their Prey at Neah Bay - 1910.jpg|thumb|right|299px|Makah whalers stripping the flesh from a whale, c. 1910. The Makah whaling technique is difficult and labor-intensive. The men hunt from Cedrus|cedar canoes, each seating six to nine people and more recently, from small fishing vessels. They take these into the Pacific Ocean adjacent to their reservation territory. Various traditional criteria are used to determine the best whale to harvest. By counting the whale's exhalations, the hunters determine when the whale is about to dive, and determine from this the best time to strike. Approaching the whale's left side, the hunter strikes when the whale is 3–4 feet deep, to avoid the force of the whale's tail. The harpoon is 16–18 feet long, composed of two pieces of taxus|yew wood spliced together. Historically, hunters used a mussel shell tip, in conjunction with barbs from elk horns. Since the late 20th century, hunters have used a steel "yankee style" head, but they have retained the yew wood shaft because of its flexibility, water resistance, and strength. Held fast to the whale, the harpoon shaft comes loose, to be recovered later, and a line is thrown from the canoe with seal skin floats attached, to provide drag to weaken the whale. In the past, a series of smaller lances were used to repeatedly strike the whale, gradually weakening and killing it, often over a period of hours, and in some cases, days. Recently, hunters have adopted use of a big game rifle after the harpoon strike, to ensure a more efficient kill. The International Whaling Commission permits four cartridges in whaling: .458 Winchester Magnum, .460 Weatherby Magnum, .50 BMG, and the .577 Tyrannosaur, which the Makah fir ...
