    | birth_place = Cambridgeport, Cambridge, Massachusetts|Cambridgeport, Massachusetts, U.S. | death_date =  | death_place = Off Fire Island, NY, U.S. | occupation = Teacher <br>Journalist <br>Critic | movement = Transcendentalism | signature = Appletons' Fuller Timothy Sarah Margaret signature.jpg }} "Sarah Margaret Fuller" (May 23, 1810 – July 19, 1850), sometimes referred to as "Margaret Fuller Ossoli", was an American journalist, editor, critic, translator, and women's rights advocate associated with the American transcendentalism movement. She was the first American female war correspondent and full-time book reviewer in journalism. Her "book Woman in the Nineteenth Century" is considered the first major feminism|feminist work in the United States. Born Sarah Margaret Fuller in Cambridge, Massachusetts, she was given a substantial early education by her father, Timothy Fuller, a lawyer who died in 1835 due to cholera. She later had more formal schooling and became a teacher before, in 1839, she began overseeing her Conversations series: classes for women meant to compensate for their lack of access to higher education. She became the first editor of the transcendentalist journal "The Dial" in 1840, which was the year her writing career started to succeed, before joining the staff of the "New-York Tribune" under Horace Greeley in 1844. By the time she was in her 30s, Fuller had earned a reputation as the wikt:well-read|best-read person in New England, male or female, and became the first woman allowed to use the library at Harvard College. Her seminal work, "Woman in the Nineteenth Century", was published in 1845. A year later, she was sent to Europe for the "Tribune" as its first female correspondent. She soon became involved with the Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states|revolutions in Italy and allied herself with Giuseppe Mazzini. She had a relationship with Giovanni Ossoli, with whom she had a child. All three members of the family died in a shipwreck off Fire Island, New York, as they were traveling to the United States in 1850. Fuller's body was never recovered. Fuller was an advocate of women's rights and, in particular, women's education and the right to employment. Fuller, along with Samuel Taylor Coleridge, wanted to stay free of what she called the "strong mental odor" of female teachers. She also encouraged many other reforms in society, including prison reform and the Abolitionism in the United States|emancipation of slaves in the United States. Many other advocates for women's rights and feminism, including Susan B. Anthony, cite Fuller as a source of inspiration. Many of her contemporaries, however, were not supportive, including her former friend Harriet Martineau. She said that Fuller was a talker rather than an activist. Shortly after Fuller's death, her importance faded; the editors who prepared her letters to be published, believing her fame would be short-lived, censored or altered much of her work before publication. ==Biography==  File:MargaretFullerHouseJuly2008.jpg|thumb|right|Birthplace and childhood home of Margaret Fuller Sarah Margaret Fuller was born on May 23, 1810,Nelson, Randy F. "The Almanac of American Letters". Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: p. 42.  in Cambridgeport, Massachusetts, the first child of Congressman Timothy Fuller and Margaret Crane Fuller. She was named after her paternal grandmother and her mother, but by age nine she dropped "Sarah" and insisted on being called "Margaret."Von Mehren, p. 10 The Margaret Fuller House, in which she was born, is still standing. Her father taught her to read and write at the age of three and a half, shortly after the couple's second daughter, Julia Adelaide, died at 14 months old.Von Mehren, pp. 11–12. He offered her an education as rigorous as any boy's at the time and forbade her to read the typical feminine fare of the time, such as etiquette books and sentimental novels.Douglas, p. 264. He incorporated Latin into his teaching shortly after the birth of the couple's son Eugene in May 1815, and soon Margaret was translating simple passages from Virgil.Von Mehren, p. 12.  Later in life Margaret blamed her father's exacting love and his valuation of accuracy and precision for her childhood nightmares and sleepwalking.Baker, Anne. "Margaret Fuller" in "Writers of the American Renaissance: An A to Z Guide". Denise D. Knight, editor. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2003: p. 130.  During the day Margaret spent time with her mother, who taught her household chores and sewing.Blanchard, p. 19. In 1817, her brother William Henry Fuller was born, and her father was elected as a representative in the United States Congress. For the next eight years, he spent four to six months a year in Washington, D.C.Von Mehren, p. 13. At age ten, Fuller wrote a cryptic note which her father saved: "On 23 May 1810, was born one foredoomed to sorrow and pain, and like others to have misfortunes."Deiss, p. 277. Fuller began her formal education at the Port School in Cambridgeport in 1819 before attending the Boston Lyceum for Young Ladies from 1821 to 1822.Powell, John. "Fuller, Margaret" in "Biographical Dictionary of Literary Influences: The Nineteenth Century, 1800-1914". Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2001: p. 164.  In 1824, she was sent to the School for Young Ladies in Groton, Massachusetts|Groton, on the advice of aunts and uncles, though she resisted the idea at first.Blanchard, p. 41. While she was there, Timothy Fuller did not run for re-election, in order to help John Quincy Adams with his presidential campaign in 1824; he hoped Adams would return the favor with a governmental appointment.Von Mehren, p. 29. On June 17, 1825, Fuller attended the ceremony at which the American Revolutionary War hero Gilbert du Motier, marquis de La Fayette|Marquis de Lafayette laid the cornerstone of the Bunker Hill Monument 50 years after the battle.Von Mehren, p. 28. The 15-year-old Fuller introduced herself to Lafayette in a letter which concluded: "Should we both live, and it is possible to a female, to whom the avenues of glory are seldom accessible, I will recal my name to your recollection." Early on, Fuller sensed herself to be a significant person and thinker.Marshall, p. 39. Fuller left the Groton school after two years and returned home at 16.Blanchard, p. 46. At home she studied the classics and trained herself in several modern languages and read world literature.Kane, Paul. "Poetry of the American Renaissance". New York: George Braziller, 1995: p. 156. .  By this time, she realized she did not fit in with other young women her age. She wrote, "I have felt that I was not born to the common womanly lot."Slater, p. 19. Eliza Farrar, wife of Harvard professor John Farrar (scientist)|John Farrar and author of "The Young Lady's Friend" (1836), attempted to train her in feminine etiquette until the age of 20,Blanchard, pp. 61–62. but was never wholly successful.Slater, p. 20.  Fuller was an avid reader, known for translating German literature and bringing German Romanticism to the United States. By the time she was in her 30s, she had earned a reputation as the best-read person, male or female, in New England.Douglas, p. 263 She used her knowledge to give private lessons based on the teaching style of Elizabeth Peabody|Elizabeth Palmer Peabody.Von Mehren, p.  82 Fuller hoped to earn her living through journalism and translation; her first published work, a response to historian George Bancroft, appeared in November 1834 in the "North American Review".Dickenson, p. 91  When she was 23, her father's law practice failed and he moved the family to a farm in Groton.Slater, pp. 22–23 On February 20, 1835, Frederic Henry Hedge and James Freeman Clarke asked her to contribute to each of their periodicals. Clarke helped her publish her first literary review in the "Western Messenger" in June: criticisms of recent biographies on George Crabbe and Hannah More.Von Mehren, pp. 64–66 In the fall of that year, she suffered a terrible migraine with a fever that lasted nine days. Fuller continued to experience such headaches throughout her life.Blanchard, p. 92 While she was still recovering, her father died of cholera on October 2, 1835.Von Mehren, p. 71 She was deeply affected by his death: "My father's image follows me constantly", she wrote.Blanchard, p. 93 She vowed to step in as the head of the family and take care of her widowed mother and younger siblings.Von Mehren, p. 72 Her father had not left a will, and two of her uncles gained control of his property and finances, later assessed at $18,098.15, and the family had to rely on them for support. Humiliated by the way her uncles were treating the family, Fuller wrote that she regretted being "of the softer sex, and never more than now".Von Mehren, p. 75 File:Greene Street School.png|right|thumb|The Greene Street School where Fuller taught from 1837 to 1839 Around this time, Fuller was hoping to prepare a biography of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, but felt that she could work on it only if she traveled to Europe. Her father's death and her sudden responsibility for her family caused her to abandon this idea. In 1836, Fuller was given a job teaching at Amos Bronson Alcott|Bronson Alcott's Temple School in Boston, Massachusetts|Boston,Blanchard, pp. 106–107 where she remained for a year. She then accepted an invitation to teach under Hiram Fuller (journalist)|Hiram Fuller (no relation) at the Greene Street School in Providence, Rhode Island, in April 1837 with the unusually high salary of $1,000 per year.Slater, pp. 30–31 Her family sold the Groton farm and Fuller moved with them to Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts.Slater, p. 32 On November 6, 1839, Fuller held the first of her Conversations,Slater, p. 43 discussions among local women who met in the Boston home of the Peabodys.Brenda Wineapple|Wineapple, Brenda. "Nathaniel Hawthorne 1804–1864: A Brief Biography", "A Historical Guide to Nathaniel Hawthorne", Larry J. Reynolds, ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001: p. 25.  Fuller intended to compensate for the lack of women's educationCheever, p. 32 with discussions and debates focused on subjects including the fine arts, history, mythology, literature, and nature.Gura, p. 134  Serving as the "nucleus of conversation", Fuller also intended to answer the "great questions" facing women and encourage women "to question, to define, to state and examine their opinions".Marshall, p. 134. She asked her participants, "What were we born to do? How shall we do it? Which so few ever propose to themselves 'till their best years are gone by".Marshall, Megan. "The Peabody Sisters: Three Women Who Ignited American Romanticism". Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2005: p. 387.  In Conversations, Fuller was finally finding equal intellectual companions among her female contemporaries.Marshall, p. 141. A number of significant figures in the women's rights movement attended these gatherings, including Sophia Ripley|Sophia Dana Ripley, Caroline Sturgis Tappan|Caroline Sturgis,Marshall, Megan. "The Peabody Sisters: Three Women Who Ignited American Romanticism". Boston: Mariner Books, 2005: pp. 386–387.  and Maria White Lowell.  In October 1839, Ralph Waldo Emerson was seeking an editor for his transcendentalism|transcendentalist journal "The Dial". After several declined the position, he offered it to Fuller, referring to her as "my vivacious friend."Gura, 128 Emerson had met Fuller in Cambridge in 1835; of that meeting, he admitted: "she made me laugh more than I liked." The next summer, Fuller spent two weeks at Ralph Waldo Emerson House|Emerson's home in Concord.Slater, 47–48 Fuller accepted Emerson's offer to edit "The Dial" on October 20, 1839, and began work in the first week of 1840.Von Mehren, 120 She edited the journal from 1840 to 1842, though her promised annual salary of $200 was never paid.Dickenson, 101–102 Because of her role, she was soon recognized as one of the most important figures of the transcendental movement and was invited to George Ripley (transcendentalist)|George Ripley's Brook Farm, a communal experiment.Gura, 156 Fuller never officially joined the community but was a frequent visitor, often spending New Year's Eve there.Blanchard, 187 In the summer of 1843, she traveled to Chicago, Milwaukee, Niagara Falls, and Buffalo, New York;Blanchard, 196 while there, she interacted with several Native Americans, including members of the Ottawa (tribe)|Ottawa and the Ojibwa|Chippewa tribes.Slater, 80 She reported her experiences in a book called "Summer on the Lakes", which she completed writing on her 34th birthday in 1844.Slater, 82 The critic Evert Augustus Duyckinck called it &q ...
