     The English language|English word ""militant"" is both an adjective and a noun, and it is generally used to mean vigorously Active lifestyle|active, combative and/or aggression|aggressive, especially in support of a cause, as in "militant reformers". It comes from the 15th century Latin ""warrior"" meaning "to serve as a soldier". The related modern concept of the militia as a defensive organization against invaders grew out of the Anglo-Saxon fyrd. In times of crisis, the militiaman left his civilian duties and became a soldier until the emergency was over, when he returned to his civilian occupation. The current meaning of "militant" does not usually refer to a registered soldier: it can be anyone who subscribes to the idea of using vigorous, sometimes extreme, activity to achieve an objective, usually political. A "militant  activist" would be expected to be more confrontational and aggressive than an activist not described as militant. Militance may or may not include violence|physical violence, armed combat, terrorism, and the like. The Trotskyist Militant (Trotskyist group)|Militant group in the United Kingdom published a newspaper, was active in labour disputes, moved resolutions in political meetings, but was not based on violence. The purpose of the Christian Church Militant is to struggle against sin, the devil and ". . . the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Ephesians 6:12), but it is not a violent movement. ==As adjective== Militant can mean "vigorously Active lifestyle|active and aggression|aggressive, especially in support of a cause" as in 'militant reformers'. The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, defines "militant" as "Having a combative character; aggressive, especially in the service of a cause". The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines "militant" as "aggressively active (as in a cause)". It says that the word "militant" might typically be used in phrases such as 'militant conservationists' or 'a militant attitude'. An example of the adjective usages is demonstrated when "The New York Times" ran an article titled "Militant Environmentalists Planning Summer Protests to Save Redwoods" describing a group that believes in "confrontational demonstrations" and "nonviolent tactics" to get across their message of preserving the environment. Another usage example includes 'a militant political activist', drawing attention to behaviours typical of those engaged in intensive political activism. The political protests headed by the Reverend Al Sharpton have been described as militant in nature in "The Washington Post". In general usage, a "militant" person is a "confrontational" person who does not necessarily use violence. "Militant" is often used within some religious circles to denote the continuous battle of Christians (as church members) or the Christian Church in their struggle against sin. In particular, the Roman Catholic Church differentiates between Church militant and church triumphant. Ellen G. White, one of the founders of the Seventh-day Adventist church, says "Now the church is militant. Now we are confronted with a world in darkness, almost wholly given over to idolatry." Such religious meaning must not be confused with the word 'belligerent' used to describe extremist religious behaviours found in some who, based on their extreme religious beliefs or ideologies, take up weapons and become involved in warfare, or who commit acts of violence or terrorism in an attempt to advance their extremist religious agendas. Such extremist groups can be Christian, Muslims, Jewish, or of any other religious affiliation. ==As noun== A "militant", as a noun, is a person who uses militant methods in pursuit of an objective; the term is not associated with the military. "Militant" can refer to an individual displaying aggressive behavior or attitudes. "Militant" is sometimes used as a euphemism for "terrorist" or "armed insurgent". (For more on this, see #Mass media usage|mass media usage below.) The word "militant" is sometimes used to describe groups that do not name or describe themselves as militants, but that advocate extreme violence. In the early 21st century, members of groups involved in Islamic terrorism such as Al-Qaeda and ISIS are usually described as militants. Example of use of "militant" to describe a group suspected of carrying out a suicide bombing(Boko Haram) ==Mass media usage== Newspapers, magazines, and other information sources may deem "militant" a neutral term,Juergensmeyer, Mark. Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious Violence. Comparative studies in religion and society, 13. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003. Page 9. whereas "terrorist"Richard Jackson, Jeroen Gunning, Marie Breen Smyth, Critical Terrorism Studies: A New Research Agenda. Taylor & Francis, 2009. Page 162. or "guerrilla warfare|guerrilla"Peloso, Vincent C. Work, Protest, and Identity in Twentieth-Century Latin America. Jaguar books on Latin America, no. 26. Wilmington, Del: Scholarly Resources, 2003. Page 238. conventionally indicates disapproval of the behavior of the individual or organization so labeled, regardless of the motivations for such behavior. "Militant", at other times, can refer to anyone not a member of formal armed forces engaging in warfare or serving as a combatant. The mass media sometimes uses the term ""militant"" in the context of terrorism. Journalists sometimes apply the term "militant" to paramilitary movements using terrorism as a tactic. The mass media also has used the term "militant groups" or "radical militants" for terrorist organizations.Sanders, Clinton. Marginal Conventions: Popular Culture, Mass Media, and Social Deviance. Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1990. Decoding the Mass Media and Terrorism Connection. Page 98.Paul Wilkinson, "Homeland security in the UK: future preparedness for terrorist attack since 9/11". Taylor & Francis, 2007. Page 55.Savitch, H. V. Cities in a Time of Terror: Space, Territory, and Local Resilience. Cities and contemporary society. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 2008. Page 45.  Those resisting a foreign military occupation can be seen as not meriting the label "terrorists" because their acts of political violence against military targets of a foreign occupier do not violate international law. Protocol 1 of the Geneva Conventions gives lawful combatant status to those engaging in armed conflicts against alien (or foreign) Military occupation|occupation, colonialism|colonial domination and racist regime|régimes. Non-uniformed guerrillas also gain combatant status if they carry weapon|arms openly during military operations. Protocol 1 does not legitimize attacks on civilians by militants who fall into these categories. In the United Nations General Assembly|UN General Assembly Resolution on terrorism (42/159, 7 December 1987). which condemns international terrorism and outlines measures to combat the crime, with one proviso: "that nothing in the present resolution could in any way prejudice the right to self-determination, freedom and independence, as derived from the Charter of the United Nations, of peoples forcibly deprived of that right , particularly peoples under colonial and racist regimes and foreign occupation or other forms of colonial domination, nor...the right of these peoples to struggle to this end and to seek and receive support ." ==Span of militancy== Militants occur across the political spectrum, including racial or religious Supremacism|supremacists, separatists, abortion opponents and proponents, and environmentalists. Examples of left-wing, right-wing, and advocacy group militants include militant reformers, militant feminists, militant animal rights advocates, and militant anarchists. The phrase "militant Islam" can suggest violent and aggressive political activity by Islamic individuals, groups, movements, or governments. There are also various secret societies that are classified as militant groups. Using the U.S. president|president's authority to assassinate people worldwide who pose an "imminent threat" if "capture is not feasible", the Obama administration routinely called every victim of extrajudicial killing a militant. ==Organizations== Among organisations that describe themselves as militants, the Ulster Young Militants are an example of a group resorting to violence (intimidation, arson, and murder) as a deliberate tactic. ==Militant research== Militant research is defined as a type of research that is distinct from academia while also not synonymous with the political militant. It refuses the alienating practices of academia which separate researchers from the political meaning of their activity. In recent years it has become an increasingly popular approach for doing research especially since it attempt to resolve academic concerns related to representation and auto-critique. ==See also== Compare and contrast these related articles:  * Activist – individuals in intentional action to bring about social or political change. * Belligerent – one of a contracting parties in a conflict. * Church militant (Ecclesia Militans) – Christians who are living. * combat or fighting – purposeful conflict between one or more persons, often involving violence and intended to establish dominance over the opposition. * combatant – a soldier or guerril ...
