  "Minamata disease" is a neurological disease caused by severe mercury poisoning. Signs and symptoms include ataxia, numbness in the hands and feet, general muscle weakness, Tunnel vision|loss of peripheral vision, and damage to Hearing (sense)|hearing and Manner of articulation|speech. In extreme cases, insanity, paralysis, coma, and death follow within weeks of the onset of symptoms. A Birth defect|congenital form of the disease can also affect fetuses in the womb and may cause cerebral palsy. The diease aswell could affect your own heart by coughing, huge  mercury pressure and radioactivity. Minamata disease was first discovered in the city of Minamata, Kumamoto|Minamata, Kumamoto Prefecture, Japan, in 1956, hence its name. It was caused by the release of methylmercury in the industrial wastewater treatment|industrial wastewater from a chemical factory owned by the Chisso Corporation, which continued from 1932 to 1968. It has also been suggested that some of the Mercury(II) sulfate|mercury sulfate in the wastewater was also metabolized to methylmercury by bacteria in the sediment. and references therein. This highly toxic chemical Bioaccumulation|bioaccumulated and Biomagnification|biomagnified in shellfish and fish in Minamata Bay and the Shiranui Sea, which, when eaten by the local population, resulted in mercury poisoning. While cat, dog, pig, and human deaths continued for 36 years, Chisso and the Kumamoto prefectural government did little to prevent the epidemic. The animal effects were severe enough in cats that they came to be named as having "dancing cat fever". As of March 2001, 2,265 victims had been officially recognized as having Minamata diseaseOfficial government figure as of March 2001. See  and over 10,000 had received financial compensation from Chisso.See  , Frequently asked questions, Question 6 <!-- More recent figures required! --> By 2004, Chisso had paid US$86 million in compensation, and in the same year was ordered to clean up its contamination.Jane Hightower (2008). "Diagnosis Mercury: Money, Politics and Poison", Island Press, p. 77. On March 29, 2010, a settlement was reached to compensate as-yet uncertified victims., "Asahi Shimbun" news, 31 March 2010, retrieved 1 April 2010 A second outbreak of Minamata disease occurred in Niigata Prefecture in 1965. The original Minamata disease and Niigata Minamata disease are considered two of the Four Big Pollution Diseases of Japan. == 1908–1955 ==  In 1908, the Chisso Corporation first opened a chemical factory in Minamata, Kumamoto|Minamata, Kumamoto Prefecture, located on the west coast of the southern island of Kyūshū. Initially producing fertilisers, the factory followed the nationwide expansion of Japan's chemical industry, branching out into production of acetylene, acetaldehyde, acetic acid, vinyl chloride, and octanol, among others. The Minamata factory became the most advanced in all of Japan, both before and after World War II. The waste products resulting from the manufacture of these chemicals were released into Minamata Bay through the factory wastewater. These pollutants had an environmental impact. Fisheries were damaged in terms of reduced catches, and in response Chisso reached two separate compensation agreements with the fishery cooperative in 1926 and 1943.Harada, p15 The rapid expansion of the Chisso factory spurred on the local economy, and as the company prospered so did Minamata. This fact, combined with the lack of other industry, meant that Chisso had great influence in the city. At one point, over half of the tax revenue of Minamata City authority came from Chisso and its employees, and the company and its subsidiaries were responsible for creating a quarter of all jobs in Minamata.George, pp35-36 The city was even dubbed Chisso's "castle town," in reference to the Jōkamachi|capital cities of feudal lords who ruled Japan during the Edo period.George, p26 The Chisso factory first started acetaldehyde production in 1932, with 210&nbsp;tons that year. In 1951, production had jumped to 6,000&nbsp;tons and eventually peaked at 45,245 tons in 1960.Report of the Social Scientific Study Group on Minamata Disease, "", National Institute for Minamata Disease, p. 13. The factory's output historically amounted to between a quarter and a third of Japan's total acetaldehyde production. The chemical reaction used to produce the acetaldehyde employed Mercury(II) sulfate|mercury sulfate as a catalyst. Starting in August 1951, the co-catalyst was changed from manganese dioxide to ferric sulfide.Eto et al. (2010) A side reaction of this catalytic cycle led to the production of a small amount (about 5% of the outflow) of the organic mercury compound methylmercury.For further information on the chemistry of the reaction that lead to the production of methylmercury see   by Mercury Technology Services, retrieved around the 24 October 2006 As a result of the catalyst change, this highly toxic compound was released into Minamata Bay regularly between 1951 and 1968, when this production method was finally discontinued.Gilhooly, Rob, "", "Japan Times", 13 June 2015 == 1956–1959 == On 21 April 1956, a five-year-old girl was examined at Chisso's factory hospital in Minamata. The physicians were puzzled by her symptoms: difficulty walking, difficulty speaking, and convulsions. Two days later, her younger sister also began to exhibit the same symptoms and she, too, was hospitalised. The girls' mother informed doctors that her neighbour's daughter was also experiencing similar problems. After a house-to-house investigation, eight further patients were discovered and hospitalised. On 1 May, the hospital director reported to the local public health office the discovery of an "epidemic of an unknown disease of the central nervous system", marking the official discovery of Minamata disease.Harada, p10 To investigate the epidemic, the city government and various medical practitioners formed the Strange Disease Countermeasures Committee at the end of May 1956. Owing to the localised nature of the disease, it was suspected to be Infectious disease|contagious and as a precaution patients were isolated and their homes disinfected. Although contagion was later disproved, this initial response contributed to the Social stigma|stigmatisation and discrimination experienced by Minamata survivors from the local community. During its investigations, the committee uncovered surprising anecdotal evidence of the strange behaviour of cats and other wildlife in the areas surrounding patients' homes. From around 1950 onward, cats had been seen to have convulsions, go mad, and die. Locals called it the "cat dancing disease", owing to their erratic movement. Crows had fallen from the sky, seaweed no longer grew on the sea bed, and fish floated dead on the surface of the sea. As the extent of the outbreak was understood, the committee invited researchers from Kumamoto University (or Kumadai) to help in the research effort.Nicol, C.W., "", "Japan Times", 7 October 2012, p. 10 The Kumamoto University Research Group was formed on 24 August 1956. Researchers from the School of Medicine began visiting Minamata regularly and admitted patients to the university hospital for detailed examinations. A more complete picture of the symptoms exhibited by patients was gradually uncovered. The disease developed without any prior warning, with patients complaining of a loss of sensation and numbness in their hands and feet. They became unable to grasp small objects or fasten buttons. They could not run or walk without stumbling, their voices changed in pitch, and many patients complained of difficulties seeing, hearing, and swallowing. In general, these symptoms worsened and were followed by severe convulsions, coma, and eventually death. By October 1956, forty patients had been discovered, fourteen of whom had died: an alarming case fatality rate of 35%.Harada, pp23-24  Researchers from Kumadai also began to focus on the cause of the strange disease. They found that the victims, often members of the same family, were clustered in fishing hamlets along the shore of Minamata Bay. The staple food of victims was invariably fish and shellfish from Minamata Bay. The cats in the local area, which tended to eat scraps from the family table, had died with symptoms similar to those now discovered in humans. This led the researchers to believe that the outbreak was caused by some kind of Foodborne illness|food poisoning, with contaminated fish and shellfish being the prime suspects. On 4 November, the research group announced its initial findings: "Minamata disease is rather considered to be poisoning by a heavy metals|heavy metal, presumably it enters the human body mainly through fish and shellfish."Harada, pp26-27  {| class="toccolours" border="1" width="200px" cellpadding="5" style="float: right; clear: right; margin: 0 0 1em 1em; border-collapse: collapse;" |- | align="center" | Image:Methylmercury-cation-3D-vdW.png|150px<br>Image:Methyl mercury.svg|150px |- | Methylmercury, an Organic compound|organic Mercury (element)|mercury compound released in factory wastewater and the cause of Minamata disease |} As soon as the investigation identified a heavy metal as the causal substance, the wastewater from the Chisso factory was immediately suspected as the origin. The company's own tests revealed that its wastewater contained many heavy metals in concentrations sufficiently high to bring about serious environmental degradation, including lead, mercury (element)|mercury, manganese, arsenic, thallium, and copper, plus the chalcogen selenium. Identifying which particular poison was responsible for the disease proved to be extremely difficult and time-consuming. During 1957 and 1958, many different theories were proposed by different researchers. At first, manganese was thought to be the causal substance due to the high concentrations found in fish and the organ (anatomy)|organs of the deceased. Thallium, selenium, and a multiple contaminant theory were also proposed, but in March 1958, visiting British neurologist Douglas McAlpine suggested that Minamata symptoms resembled those of Organic compound|organic mercury poisoning, so the focus of the investigation centered on mercury. In February 1959, the mercury distribution in Minamata Bay was investigated. The results shocked the researchers involved. Large quantities of mercury were detected in fish, shellfish, and sludge from the bay. The highest concentrations centred around the Chisso factory wastewater canal in Hyakken Harbour and decreased going out to sea, clearly identifying the plant as the source of contamination. Pollution was so heavy at the mouth of the wastewater canal, a figure of 2&nbsp;kg of mercury per ton of sediment was measured: a level that would be economically viable to mine. Indeed, Chisso did later set up a subsidiary to reclaim and sell the mercury recovered from the sludge.Harada, p50 Hair samples were taken from the individuals with the disease and also from the Minamata population in general. In patients, the maximum mercury level recorded was 705&nbsp;parts per million (ppm), indicating very heavy exposure and in nonsymptomatic Minamata residents, the level was 191&nbsp;ppm. This compared to an average level of 4&nbsp;ppm for people living outside the Minamata area. On 12 November 1959, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Japan)|Ministry of Health and Welfare's Minamata Food Poisoning Subcommittee published its results: {{blockquote|Minamata disease is a poisoning disease that affects mainly the central nervous system and  ...
