    | image       = Mute.jpeg | parent      = "Mute Artists Ltd.:" <br> Independent (2010–present) <br> "Mute Records Ltd.:" Independent (1978–2002) <br> EMI|EMI Group Limited (2002–2012) <br> Universal Music Group (2012) <br> BMG Rights Management (2013–present) | founded     =  | founder     = Daniel Miller (music producer)|Daniel Miller | distributor = "Mute Artists Ltd.:" <br>PIAS Cooperative (worldwide, 2013–present) <br> Alternative Distribution Alliance (North America, 2014–present)<br> "Mute Records Ltd.:" <br> Alternative Distribution Alliance (worldwide, 2017–present) | genre       =  | country     = United Kingdom | location    = Hammersmith, London | website     =  }} "Mute Records" is a British independent record label owned and founded in 1978 by Daniel Miller (music producer)|Daniel Miller. It has featured several prominent musical acts on its roster such as Depeche Mode, Erasure, Einstürzende Neubauten, Fad Gadget, Goldfrapp, Grinderman, Inspiral Carpets, Moby, New Order (band)|New Order, Laibach, Nitzer Ebb, Yann Tiersen, Wire (band)|Wire, Yeasayer, Fever Ray, Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Yazoo (band)|Yazoo, and M83 (band)|M83. ==History==  During 1978, Daniel Miller (music producer)|Daniel Miller began recording music, using synthesisers, under the name The Normal.Mute - Documentary Evidence - Biba Kopf 1986 He recorded the tracks "T.V.O.D." and "Warm Leatherette" and distributed them through Rough Trade Shops under the label name Mute Records. The label was formed initially just to release the one single.Muted Response - Daniel Miller Interview - E&MM 1984 "T.V.O.D."/"Warm Leatherette" became a cult hit ensuring the future of the label. "Warm Leatherette" was later Cover version|covered by Grace Jones and Chicks on Speed as well as Rose McDowell. After meeting Robert Rental (who had previously worked with Thomas Leer), Miller began recording and playing live as Robert Rental & The Normal. In 1979 the band went on tour supporting the Punk rock|punk band Stiff Little Fingers, which had just released an album distributed by Rough Trade Records|Rough Trade.  In 1980, Miller released the single "Kebab-Träume" by the German band Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft (D.A.F.), who had recently moved to London. The band's 1980 album, "Die Kleinen und die Bösen", was the first album released by the new label. The album had the catalogue prefix "STUMM", a play on the record label's name, meaning "Muteness|mute" in German language|German. This prefix was used through most of the label's album catalogue. Also in 1980, Miller recorded and released the cover single "Memphis, Tennessee (song)|Memphis Tennessee" under the name Silicon Teens. The band was Miller's realisation of a dream Mute Records group whose main instruments were synthesisers. In mid-1980, Mute Records released the Silicon Teens' album, titled "Music For Parties". Around this time the artist Fad Gadget had begun recording new Demo (music)|demos, including the track "Back To Nature". This was released as a single in 1980, followed by the next single "Ricky's Hand" and the album "Fireside Favourites" recorded at Blackwing Studios. File:Mute records.jpg|left|thumb|Previous logo. September 1980 saw the release of the double-holed, multi-speed Gramophone record|7" single by Non & Smegma, one of the first experimental noise releases from the label. Boyd Rice (Non) went on to release several more recordings with Mute Records. After touring with Daniel Miller as Robert Rental & The Normal, Robert Rental released his only Mute Records single, "Double Heart", a rare remaining trace of this late electronic music pioneer. Miller approached Depeche Mode in 1980, after seeing them perform in London, wanting them to record a single for his label; that first single was "Dreaming of Me". Emerging out of the British electronic pop scene, Depeche Mode quickly asserted themselves as a radio-friendly pop group, and they had hits with their next three singles, including the UK Singles Chart|UK top ten single "Just Can't Get Enough (Depeche Mode song)|Just Can't Get Enough". Their loyalty to Mute was reciprocated by the label's rapid expansion to cope with their success. In defiance of the major record labels' predictions of failure, Depeche Mode became successful worldwide, even after the departure of principal songwriter Vince Clarke. Martin Gore took over the main songwriting role, opening the band up to different influences and sustaining their creativity. Mute continued to support other experimental artists, such as NON, releasing an album of Boyd Rice's pre-NON recordings, titled "Boyd Rice". 1982 began with the release of the 12-inch single, "Rise", by Boyd Rice, released under the name NON. Fad Gadget released his third album for the label, titled "Under the Flag", influenced by the current Falklands War and the feeling of being British in the most unseemly of times. The album spawned the singles "For Whom the Bells Toll" and "Life on the Line". Mute Record's big commercial success of 1982 was the band Yazoo (band)|Yazoo, the duo of Vince Clarke and Alison Moyet. After leaving Depeche Mode, Clarke had set up a studio in the Blackwing Studios complex, where he recorded the singles "Only You (Yazoo song)|Only You" and "Don't Go (Yazoo song)|Don’t Go".E&MM Magazine - March 1984 That year, Mute licensed the single "Fred Vom Jupiter" from the German record label Atatak. The track was recorded by Holger Hiller, Andreas Dorau and the schoolgirl Marinas. Also from Germany was the single "Los Ninos Del Parque", by Liaisons Dangereuses (band)|Liaisons Dangereuses, later released by Mute. Liaisons Dangereuses included Chrislo Hass, who had previously been in the German band DAF. After returning from a world tour in 1983, Depeche Mode released the Industrial music|industrial-influenced hit single "Everything Counts". Bruce Gilbert and Graham Lewis, of the band Wire (band)|Wire (who had been working together under the name Dome (band)|Dome), teamed up with Daniel Miller to form a project known as Duet Emmo, an anagram of Mute and Dome. They released an album and 12-inch single, both titled "Or So It Seems". Miller also secured the rights to the back catalogue of the experimental bands Throbbing Gristle, Cabaret Voltaire (band)|Cabaret Voltaire and Richard H. Kirk During 1983, the Australian band The Birthday Party (band)|The Birthday Party transferred from 4AD to Mute Records. The band broke up after releasing their final 12-inch EP, "Mutiny". Birthday Party's singer, Nick Cave, stayed with Mute and released his debut single as Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds. The single was a cover of the song "In the Ghetto", by Mac Davis, previously made famous by Elvis Presley. Yazoo released the album "You and Me Both" that year and disbanded. Vince Clarke then began working at Blackwing Studios under the name The Assembly. The project's first single, "Never Never (The Assembly song)|Never Never", was a hit, featuring Feargal Sharkey on vocals. Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft|D.A.F. split up, and in 1983, ex-member Robert Görl released the single "Mit Dir" on Mute. He recorded the album "Night Full of Tension" the following year, including the single "Darling Don’t Leave Me", featuring Annie Lennox. In 1984, Depeche Mode had one of their biggest hits in the UK with the single "People Are People".Mute - Documentary Evidence (Album Booklet) 1986 Their album that year, "Some Great Reward", reached number one in Germany and became their first hit in the United States. Mute released an album of archive material from the German band Einstürzende Neubauten, titled "Strategies Against Architecture '80–'83", compiled by J. G. Thirlwell|Jim Thirlwell. Mute used Berlin as a recording location at this time. Einstürzende Neubauten member F.M. Einheit contributed on the recording of the Fad Gadget album "Gag (album)|Gag", along with Rowland S. Howard (ex-guitarist for The Birthday Party), who also contributed to the 1983 Fad Gadget single "I Discover Love". Einstürzende Neubauten's Blixa Bargeld began working with Nick Cave at this time, playing guitar with Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds. The resulting 1984 album, "From Her to Eternity", included a cover of Leonard Cohen's song, "Avalanche (Leonard Cohen song)|Avalanche". In 1984, Bruce Gilbert extended his field of music into dance after a commission to write music for dancer Michael Clark (dancer)|Michael Clark.Bruce Gilbert – This Way (Editions Mego) CD sleeve notes. Gilbert recorded with engineer John Fryer (music)|John Fryer at Blackwing Studios. The recordings were documented by Mute on the album, "This Way". The synth duo I Start Counting (band)|I Start Counting released their debut single, "Letters to a Friend", in June 1984, produced by Daniel Miller.. Retrieved 7 November 2010. In subsequent years, the band would also record for the label under the names Fortran 5, John Came and Komputer. 1984 ended with the long delayed release of "Easy Listening for the Hard of Hearing" by Fad Gadget|Frank Tovey and Boyd Rice. The album was originally recorded at Blackwing Studios in May 1981, using sounds created from non-musical appliances, and other studio-generated sounds. The recordings were engineered by John Fryer and Eric Radcliffe.Easy Listening for the Hard of Hearing (Mute Records) CD sleeve notes. In 1985, a new incarnation of Simon Bonney's Crime & the City Solution formed, including ex-Birthday Party members Mick Harvey and Rowland S. Howard. The new line-up released the Extended play|EP "The Dangling Man" and later the Mini-LP|mini-album "Just South of Heaven". Mute released the single "Hypnotized" in May 1985, by newly signed artist Mark Stewart (English musician)|Mark Stewart, produced by Adrian Sherwood.. Retrieved 9 November 2010. Stewart recorded his first album for Mute, "As the Veneer of Democracy Starts to Fade", in November 1985, also produced by Sherwood, under the name Mark Stewart and the Mafia.. Retrieved 9 November 2010. Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds released their second album, "The Firstborn Is Dead", recorded at the Berlin recording studio, Hansa Tonstudio, co-produced by Flood (producer)|Flood.. Retrieved 17 November 2010. Fad Gadget began recording as Frank Tovey in 1985 and released the single "Luxury" in August that year, co-produced with Daniel Miller. Vince Clarke and Andy Bell (singer)|Andy Bell began recording as Erasure in 1985, and released their debut album the next year. Fad Gadget|Frank Tovey released his first album under his own name after leaving his Fad Gadget moniker behind him. The new album was titled "Snakes and Ladders (Frank Tovey album)|Snakes and Ladders". The initial release included a twelve-inch single containing four Fad Gadget tracks.. Retrieved 27 November 2010. To celebrate five years of Depeche Mode, Mute released a compilation album of the band's singles, "The Singles 81→85". A remastered edition was issued in October 1998 with additional tracks, including an original version of the song "Photographic", released on Some Bizzare Records.. Retrieved 17 November 2010. Wire member Graham Lewis launched his project in 1985, known as He Said, with Mute releasing the project's debut single, "Only One I". Lewis released his debut album the following year after two more singles.[http://www.mute.com/artists/publicArtistLoad.do?id=1883&a ...
