  |death_place = Clamart, Fourth French Republic|France |region = Russian philosophy |era = 20th-century philosophy |school_tradition = Christian existentialism, personalism |main_interests = Creativity, eschatology, Freedom (philosophy)|freedom |influences =  |influenced =  |notable_ideas = Emphasizing the existentialism|existential spiritual significance of Personalism|human freedom and the human person |caption= }} "Nikolai Alexandrovich Berdyaev" (; . "Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary". ; &nbsp;– 24 March 1948) was a Russian Empire|Russian philosopher, theologian, and Christian existentialism|Christian existentialist who emphasized the existentialism|existential spiritual significance of Personalism|human freedom and the human person. Alternative historical spellings of his surname in English include "Berdiaev" and "Berdiaeff", and of his given name "Nicolas" and "Nicholas". Russian paleontologist and Christian apologist Alexander V. Khramov (Borissiak Paleontological Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Ph.D. from Moscow University) attributes his ideas about an atemporal fall|atemporal human fall to Berdyaev and Evgenii Nikolaevitch Troubetzkoy. ==Biography== Nikolai Berdyaev was born at Obukhiv|Obukhovo,. Kiev Governorate (present-day Obukhiv, Ukraine) in 1874, in an aristocracy|aristocratic military family. His father, Alexander Mikhailovich Berdyaev, came from a long line of Russian nobility. Almost all of Alexander Mikhailovich's ancestors served as high-ranking military officers, but he resigned from the army quite early and became active in the social life of the aristocracy. Nikolai's mother, Alina Sergeevna Berdyaeva, was half-French and came from the top levels of both French and Russian nobility. He also had Polish people|Polish and Tatar people|Tatar origins.George M. Young, "The Russian Cosmists: The Esoteric Futurism of Nikolai Fedorov and His Followers", Oxford University Press (2012), p. 134.Stefan Berger & Alexei Miller, "Nationalizing Empires", Central European University Press (2015), p. 312. File:Nikolay Berdyaev.jpg|thumb|left|Nikolai Berdyaev in 1910 File:Николай Бердяев.jpg|thumb|338x338px|Nikolai Berdyaev in 1912 Berdyaev decided on an intellectual career and entered the Kiev University in 1894. It was a time of revolutionary fervor among the students and the intelligentsia. He became a Marxism|Marxist for a period and was arrested in a student demonstration and expelled from the university. His involvement in illegal activities led in 1897 to three years of internal exile to Vologda in northern Russia. A fiery 1913 article, entitled "Quenchers of the Spirit", criticising the Imiaslavie#Storming the monastery|rough purging of Imiaslavie Russian monks on Mount Athos by the Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church using tsarist troops, caused him to be charged with the crime of blasphemy, the punishment for which was exile to Siberia for life. The World War I|World War and the Bolshevik Revolution prevented the matter coming to trial."Self-Knowledge: An Essay in Autobiography", by Nicolas Berdyaev (Author), Katharine Lampert (Translator), Boris Jakim (Foreword) .  Berdyaev's disaffection culminated, in 1919, with the foundation of his own private academy, the ""Free Academy of Spiritual Culture"". It was primarily a forum for him to lecture on the hot topics of the day and to present them from a Christian point of view. He also presented his opinions in public lectures, and every Tuesday, the academy hosted a meeting at his home because Persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union|official Soviet anti-religious activity was intense at the time and the official policy of the Bolshevik government, with its Soviet anti-religious legislation, strongly promoted state atheism. In 1920, Berdiaev became professor of philosophy at the University of Moscow. In the same year, he was accused of participating in a conspiracy against the government; he was arrested and jailed. The feared head of the Cheka, Felix Dzerzhinsky, came in person to interrogate him, and he gave his interrogator a solid dressing down on the problems with Bolshevism. Novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in his book "The Gulag Archipelago" recounts the incident as follows: <blockquote>  was arrested twice; he was taken in 1922 for a midnight interrogation with Felix Dzerzhinsky|Dzerjinsky; Lev Kamenev|Kamenev was also there.... But Berdyaev did not humiliate himself, he did not beg, he firmly professed the moral and religious principles by virtue of which he did not adhere to the party in power; and not only did they judge that there was no point in putting him on trial, but he was freed. Now there is a man who had a "point of view"!Cited by Markovic, op. cit., p.33, footnote 36. </blockquote> After being expelled from Russia, Berdyaev and other émigrés went to Berlin, where he founded an academy of philosophy and religion, but economic and political conditions in the Weimar Republic caused him and his wife to move to Paris in 1923. He transferred his academy there, and taught, lectured and wrote, working for an exchange of ideas with the France|French and European intellectual community, and participated in a number of international conferences. File:Tombe Berdiaev2.JPG|thumb|Berdyaev's grave, Clamart (France). <!-- this isn't part of his biography... Primary source biographical works in English are Berdyaev's intellectual autobiography, published originally under the title "Dream and Reality", and Donald A. Lowrie's 1960 book, "Rebellious Prophet: A Life of Nikolai Berdyaev", written in close collaboration with Berdyaev's sister-in-law, Evgenia Rapp, and others of their close acquaintance under the auspices of the Berdiaev Société.Vide Lowrie, "Rebellious Prophet", Preface, p. ix-x --> ==Philosophical work== According to Marko Markovic, Berdyaev "was an ardent man, rebellious to all authority, an independent and "negative" spirit. He could assert himself only in negation and could not hear any assertion without immediately negating it, to such an extent that he would even be able to contradict himself and to attack people who shared his own prior opinions".Marko Marković, "La Philosophie de l'inégalité et les idées politiques de Nicolas Berdiaev" (Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines, 1978). According to Marina Makienko, Anna Panamaryova, and Andrey Gurban, Berdyaev's works are "emotional, controversial, bombastic, affective and dogmatic". They summarise that, according to Berdyaev, "man unites two worlds – the world of the divine and the natural world. ... Through the freedom and creativity the two natures must unite... To overcome the dualism of existence is possible only through creativity. David Bonner Richardson described Berdyaev's philosophy as Christian existentialism and personalism. , "Berdyaev's Philosophy of History. An Existentialist Theory of Social Creativity and Eschatology", by David Bonner Richardson, pp. 90-137. Other authors, such as political theologian Tsoncho Tsonchev, interpret Berdyaev as "Communitarianism|communitarian personalist" and Slavophilia|Slavophile. According to Tsonchev, Berdyaev's philosophical thought rests on four "pillars": freedom, creativity, person, and communion.  One of the central themes of Berdyaev's work was philosophy of love. At first he systematically developed his theory of love in a special article published in the journal "Pereval" () in 1907. Then he gave gender issues a notable place in his book "The Meaning of the Creative Act" (1916). According to him, 1) erotic energy is an eternal source of creativity, 2) eroticism is linked to beauty, and eros means search for the beautiful. He also published works about Russian history and the Russian national character. In particular, he wrote about Russian nationalism:Quoted from book by Benedikt Sarnov, "Our Soviet Newspeak: A Short Encyclopedia of Real Socialism.", pp. 446-447. Moscow: 2002,  (Наш советский новояз. Маленькая энциклопедия реального социализма).  ==Theology and relations w ...
