    "Old money" is "the Inheritance|inherited wealth of The Establishment|established upper class|upper-class families (i.e. gentry, patrician (post-Roman Europe)|patriciate)" or "a person, family, or lineage possessing inherited wealth"."Old Money" The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company, 2004. 5 November 2008. Dictionary.com http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/oldmoney The term typically describes a social class of the rich who have been able to maintain their wealth over multiple generations, often referring to perceived members of the "de facto" Aristocracy (class)|aristocracy in societies that historically lack an officially established aristocratic class (such as the United States). The term is often used in contrast with new money. == United States == "Wealth"—assets held by an individual or by a household—provides an important dimension of social stratification because it can pass from generation to generation, ensuring that a family's offspring will remain financially stable. Families with "old money" use accumulated assets or savings to bridge interruptions in income, thus guarding against downward social mobility. "Old money" applies to those of the upper class whose wealth separates them from lower social classes. According to anthropologist W. Lloyd Warner, the upper class in the United States during the 1930s was divided into the upper-upper and the lower-upper classes. The lower-upper were those who did not come from traditionally wealthy families. They earned their money from investments and business, rather than inheritance. Examples include John D. Rockefeller, whose father was a traveling peddler; Cornelius Vanderbilt, whose father operated a ferry in New York Harbor; Henry Flagler, who was the son of a Presbyterian minister; and Andrew Carnegie, who was the son of a Scottish weaver. In contrast to the "nouveau riche", whose riches were acquired in their own generation, the upper-upper class were families viewed as "quasi-aristocratic" and "High society (social class)|high society". These families had been rich and prominent in the politics of the United States for generations. In many cases their prominence dated since before the American Revolution (1765–1783), when their ancestors had accumulated fortunes as members of the elite planter class, or as merchants, slave traders, ship-owners, or fur traders. In many cases, especially in Virginia, Maryland, and the Carolinas, the source of these families' wealth were vast tracts of land granted to their ancestors by the Crown or acquired by headright during the Colonial history of the United States|colonial period. These planter class families were often related to each other through intermarriage for more than 300 years, and are sometimes known as American gentry. They produced several Founding Fathers of the United States and a number of early List of presidents of the United States|presidents of the United States. An example of this social class was George Washington, who had an estimated net worth of $525 million (in 2016 dollars) due to his vast holdings of land and Slavery in the United States|slaves, making him the second wealthiest man to serve as President of the United States. After the American Civil War (1861–1865), many in this social class saw their wealth greatly reduced. Their slaves became Freedman|freedmen. Union (American Civil War)|Union forces under Generals William Tecumseh Sherman and Philip Sheridan had also cut wide swaths of destruction through portions of Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia. They destroyed crops, killed or confiscated livestock, burned barns and gristmills, and in some cases torched plantation houses and even entire cities such as Atlanta. They were using scorched earth tactics, designed to starve the Confederate States of America into submission. After the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution (1865) and the emancipation of the slaves, many plantations were converted to sharecropping. African American freedmen were working as sharecroppers on the same land which they had worked as slaves before the war. Despite the fact that their circumstances were greatly reduced, the enactment of Jim Crow laws and the disenfranchisement of freed black people allowed many planter class families in the Southern United States to regain their political prominence, if not their great wealth, following Reconstruction era|Reconstruction (1863–1877). In the early 20th century, the upper-upper class were seen as more prestigious than the nouveau riche even if the nouveau riche had more wealth. During the late 19th century and early 20th century, the nouveau rich flaunted their wealth by building List of Gilded Age mansions|Gilded Age mansions that emulated the palaces of Monarchies in Europe|European royalty, while old money was more conservative. American "Old money" families tend to adhere to various Mainline Protestant denominations; Episcopalians and Presbyterians are the most prevalent among them. Some families with "old money" include: * The Byrd Family of Virginia is descended from William Byrd I who received a  grant on 27 October 1673 at the fall line of the James River that would later become the site of Richmond, Virginia. Byrd's son William Byrd II of Westover Plantation who inherited the land was an American Plantations in the American South|planter and author from Charles City County, Virginia|Charles City County in Colony of Virginia|colonial Virginia. He expanded his holdings to approximately  and founded the City of Richmond. At Google Books. Although much of the family's wealth was squandered during the 18th century by William Byrd III through gambling and bad investments, descendant Richard Evelyn Byrd Sr. became wealthy as an apple grower in the Shenandoah Valley and publisher of the Winchester Star newspaper. He was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1906 and served as List of Speakers of the Virginia House of Delegates|Speaker from 1908 to 1914. His son Harry Flood Byrd was elected the 50th Governor of Virginia in 1925, and later served in the US Senate until his retirement in 1965. Byrd controlled a Democratic Party (United States)|Democratic political machine known as the Byrd Organization that dominated Virginia politics for most of the 20th century. Byrd was succeeded in the US Senate by his son Harry F. Byrd Jr. who served until 1981. The family also produced early Ohio political leader and jurist, Charles Willing Byrd, pp. 526–527; J. W. Klise stated that Byrd began his legal education with his uncle. J. W. Klise, ed., State Centennial History of Highland County, 1902; 1902. Reprint. Owensboro, KY: Cook & McDowell, 1980, p. 168. and polar explorer, Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd.  * The Robert Carter I|Carter Family of Virginia is descended from Robert "King" Carter, of Lancaster County, Virginia|Lancaster County, who was a planter, businessman and colonist in Virginia and became one of the wealthiest men in the Thirteen Colonies|colonies accumulating over 300,000 acres of land. As President of the Governor's Council of the Virginia Colony, he was acting List of colonial governors of Virginia|Governor of Virginia from 1726 to 1727 after the death in office of Governor Hugh Drysdale.Brock, Robert Alonzo (1888). "Virginia and Virginians", Vol. I, p. 40. Richmond and Toledo: H.H. Hardesty. He acquired the moniker "King" due to his great wealth, political power, and autocratic business methods. His many notable descendants include: Robert Burwell, a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, Robert Carter III, who sat on the Virginia Governor's Council, Carter Braxton, a signer of Declaration of Independence, Mann Page a Virginia delegate to the Continental Congress in 1777, Confederate States Army General Robert E. Lee, Confederate Army first lieutenant Robert Randolph Carter, John Page (Virginia politician)|John Page, the 13th Governor of Virginia, Thomas Nelson Page, who served as US ambassador to Italy during the Woodrow Wilson administration, and civil engineer and industrialist William Nelson Page. * The Lindsey family is descended from Robert Lindsey, a Scottish people|Scot who arrived in the 1660s in the English Colony of Virginia. He married Susanna Opie, an heiress of English wealth, a few years later. Susanna was the only child of John Opie, and heiress of the 100,000 (15 million dollars today) dollar fortune and estate that he had accumulated. Susanna predeceased her father, so the fortune passed to his son-in-law. During the American Revolution, the grandson and great grandson of Robert, Col. John M Lindsey and Capt. James Lindsey, decided to side with the Continental Army, allowing them to keep their fortune. The Lindsey family helped the later United States stay economically important. During the 19th and 20th centuries, the family invested in shipyards, port houses, railways, real estate and the early stock market. The family is today prominent in business, and American politics. Descendants of Robert include U.S. presidents George H.W Bush, George W. Bush, Abraham Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt, Ronald Reagan, and John F. Kennedy, as well as the Vanderbilt family|Vanderbilts, the Astor family|Astors, and the Rockefeller family|Rockefellers. Many other descendants are successful entrepreneurs, governors, and congressmen. * The Randolph family of Virginia|Randolph family is descended from William Randolph, an American colonist who accumulated a vast fortune including over 20,000 acres (81 km2) of land as a planter and merchant, and played an important role in the history and government of the English colony of Virginia. He arrived in Virginia sometime between 1669 and 1673, and married Mary Isham a few years later.Emory G. Evans, "A "Topping People": The Rise and Decline of Virginia's Old Political Elite, 1680–1790" (2009), pp. 18–19 Randolph's descendants have included many prominent Americans, including U.S. President Thomas Jefferson, U.S. Chief Justice John Marshall, Confederate States Army|Confederate General, Robert E. Lee,{{cite book|editor-first=John Forrest|editor-last=Dillon|editor-link=John Forrest Dillon|title=John Marshall; life, character and judicial services as portrayed in the centenary and memorial addresses and proceedings throughout the United States on Marshall day, 1901, and in the classic orations of Binney, Story, Phelps,  ...
