    }} A "patent medicine", sometimes called a "proprietary medicine", is an over-the-counter medicine|over-the-counter (nonprescription) medicine or medicinal preparation that is typically protected and advertised by a trademark and trade name (and sometimes a patent) and claimed to be effective against minor disorders and symptoms. Its contents are typically incompletely disclosed. Antiseptics, analgesics, some sedatives, laxatives, and antacids, cold and cough medicines, and various skin preparations are included in the group. The safety and effectiveness of patent medicines and their sale is controlled and regulated by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States and corresponding authorities in other countries.. "merriam-webster.com".  Image:DeathsLaboratory.gif|thumb|200px|E. W. Kemble's "Death's Laboratory" on the cover of "Collier's" (June 3, 1905) The term is sometimes still used to describe Quackery|quack remedies of unproven effectiveness and questionable safety sold especially by peddlers in past centuries, who often also called them Elixir|elixirs, tonics, or Liniment|liniments. Current examples of quack remedies are sometimes called "nostrums" or "panaceas", but easier to understand terms like "scam", "cure-all", or  pseudoscience are more common. Patent medicines were one of the first major product categories that the advertising industry promoted; patent medicine promoters pioneered many advertising and sales techniques that were later used for other products.See Conroy (2009), passim. for an account of E. Virgil Neal, patent medicine manufacturer and promoter (e.g. the tonic, "nuxated iron", which was supposedly used by Ty Cobb, Jack Dempsey, and Pope Benedict XV), Madison Avenue pioneer, and mentor of Carl R. Byoir.  Patent medicine advertising often marketed products as being panacea (medicine)|medical panaceas (or at least a treatment for many diseases) and emphasized exotic ingredients and endorsements from purported experts or celebrities, which may or may not have been true. Patent medicine sales were increasingly constricted in the United States in the early 20th century as the Food and Drug Administration and Federal Trade Commission added ever-increasing regulations to prevent fraud, unintentional poisoning and deceptive advertising. Sellers of liniments, claimed to contain snake oil and falsely promoted as a cure-all, made the "snake oil salesman" a lasting symbol for a charlatan. == Patent medicines and advertising == Image:Mugwump.png|right|thumb|150px|Mug-wump, "for all venereal diseases" The phrase "patent medicine" comes from the late 17th century marketing of medical elixirs, when those who found favour with monarch|royalty were issued "letters patent" authorising the use of the royal endorsement in advertising. Few if any of the nostrums were actually patented; chemical patents did not come into use in the United States until 1925.  Furthermore, patenting one of these remedies would have meant publicly disclosing its ingredients, which most promoters sought to avoid. Advertisement kept these patent medications in the public eye and gave the belief that no disease was beyond the cure of patent medication. “The medicine man’s key task quickly became not production but sales, the job of persuading ailing citizens to buy his particular brand from among the hundreds offered. Whether unscrupulous or self-deluded, nostrum makers set about this task with cleverness and zeal.”James Harvey Young|Young, James Harvey. 1961. "The Toadstool Millionaires: A Social History of Patent Medicines in America before Federal Regulation". Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. p. 166 Instead, the compounders of such nostrums used a primitive version of branding to distinguish their products from the crowd of their competitors.  Many extant brands from the era live on today in brands such as Luden's cough drops, Lydia E. Pinkham's vegetable compound for women, Fletcher's Castoria and even Angostura bitters, which was once marketed as a stomachic. Though sold at high prices, many of these products were made from cheap ingredients.  Their composition was well known within the pharmacy trade, and druggists manufactured and sold (for a slightly lower price) medicines of almost identical composition. To protect profits, the branded medicine advertisements emphasized brand names, and urged the public to "accept no substitutes". At least in the earliest days, the history of patent medicines is coextensive with scientific medicine.  Empirical medicine, and the beginning of the application of the scientific method to medicine, began to yield a few orthodoxly acceptable herbal and mineral drugs for the physician's  arsenal.  These few remedies, on the other hand, were inadequate to cover the bewildering variety of diseases and symptoms.  Beyond these patches of evidence-based application, people used other methods, such as occultism; the "doctrine of signatures"&nbsp;– essentially, the application of sympathetic magic to pharmacology&nbsp;– held that nature had hidden clues to medically effective drugs in their resemblances to the human body and its parts.  This led medical men to hope, at least, that, say, walnut shells might be good for skull fractures.  Homeopathy, the notion that illness is binary and can be treated by ingredients that cause the same symptoms in healthy people, was another outgrowth of this early era of medicine. Given the state of the pharmacopoeia, and patients' demands for something to take, physicians began making "blunderbuss" concoctions of various drugs, proven and unproven.  These concoctions were the ancestors of the several nostrums. Touting these nostrums was one of the first major projects of the advertising industry.  The marketing of nostrums under implausible claims has a long history.  In Henry Fielding's "The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling|Tom Jones" (1749), allusion is made to the sale of medical compounds claimed to be universal panaceas: :"As to Squire Western, he was seldom out of the sick-room, unless when he was engaged either in the field or over his bottle. Nay, he would sometimes retire hither to take his beer, and it was not without difficulty that he was prevented from forcing Jones to take his beer too: for no quackery|quack ever held his nostrum to be a more general panacea than he did this; which, he said, had more virtue in it than was in all the Medication|physic in an apothecary's shop." File:Tuberclecide advertisement in The Grizzly Bear April 1914.png|thumb|left|1914 advertisement implying approval by the U.S. government Within the English-speaking world, patent medicines are as old as journalism.  "Anderson's Pills" were first made in England in the 1630s; the recipe was allegedly learned in Venice by a Scotland|Scot who claimed to be physician to Charles I of England|King Charles I.  Daffy's Elixir was invented about 1647 and remained popular in Britain and the USA until the late 19th century. The use of "letters patent" to obtain exclusive marketing rights to certain labelled formulas and their marketing fueled the circulation of early newspapers.  The use of invented names began early.  In 1726 a patent was also granted to the makers of Dr Bateman's Pectoral Drops; at least on the documents that survive, there was no Dr. Bateman.  This was the enterprise of a Benjamin Okell and a group of promoters who owned a warehouse and a print shop to promote the product. A number of United States|American institutions owe their existence to the patent medicine industry, most notably a number of the older almanacs, which were originally given away as promotional items by patent medicine manufacturers.  Perhaps the most successful industry that grew up out of the business of patent medicine advertisements, though, was founded by William H. Gannett in Maine in 1866.  There were few circulating newspapers in Maine in that era, so Gannett founded a periodical, "Comfort", whose chief purpose was to propose the merits of "Oxien", a nostrum made from the fruit of the baobab tree, to the rural folks of Maine. Gannett's newspaper became the first publication of Guy Gannett Communications, which eventually owned four Maine dailies and several television stations. (The family-owned firm is unrelated to the Gannett Corporation that publishes "USA Today".) An early pioneer in the use of advertising to promote patent medicine was New York businessman Benjamin Brandreth, whose "Vegetable Universal Pill" eventually became one of the best-selling patent medicines in the United States.  “…A congressional committee in 1849 reported that Brandreth was the nation’s largest proprietary advertiser… Between 1862 and 1863 Brandreth’s average annual gross income surpassed $600,000…”  For fifty years Brandreth’s name was a household word in the United States. Indeed, the Brandreth pills were so well known they received mention in Herman Melville's classic novel "Moby-Dick". Image:Kickapoo Sagwa.png|thumb|Kickapoo Indian "Sagwa", sold at medicine shows Another publicity method – undertaken mostly by smaller firms – was the "medicine show," a traveling Circus (performing art)|circus of sorts that offered vaudeville-style entertainments on a small scale, and climaxed in a pitch for some sort of cure-all nostrum.  "bodybuilding|Muscle man" acts were especially popular on these tours, for this enabled the salesman to tout the physical vigour the product supposedly offered.  The showmen frequently employed shills, who stepped forward from the crowd to offer "unsolicited" testimonials about the benefits of the medicine.  Often, the nostrum was manufactured and bottled in the wagon in which the show travelled. The Kickapoo people|Kickapoo Indian Medicine Company became one of the largest and most successful medicine show operators.  Their shows had an American Indian or Wild West theme, and employed many Native Americans in the United States|American Indians as spokespeople such as the Modoc War scout Donald McKay (scout)|Donald McKay.  The "medicine show" lived on in American folklore and Western movies long after they vanished from public life. == Ingredients and their uses ==  Image:SickMadeWell.jpg|thumbnail|left|Sick Made Well, Weak Made Strong, Elixir of Life, etc. Typical ad for patent medicine.  File:Kilmer's Swamp Root.jpg|thumb|left|upright|Kilmer's Swamp Root Many promoters desired to lend their preparations a sense of exoticism and mystery.  Unlikely ingredients such as the baobab fruit in "Oxien" were a recurring theme.  A famous patent medicine of the period was "Dr. Kilmer's Swamp Root"; unspecified roots found in swamps had remarkable effects on the kidneys, according to its literature. Native American themes were also useful: natives, imagined to be noble savages, were thought to be in tune with nature, and heirs to a body of traditional lore about herbal remedies and natural cures.  One example of this approach from the period was "Kickapoo Indian Sagwa", a product of the Kickapoo Indian Medicine Company of Connecticut (completely unrelated to the real Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma|Kickapoo Indian tribe of Oklahoma), supposedly based on a Native American recipe.  This nostrum was the inspiration for Al Capp's "Kickapoo Joy Juice," featured in the comic strip, "Li'l Abner".  Another benefit of ...
