   "Pictish" is the extinct language|extinct Brittonic language spoken by the Picts, the people of eastern and northern Scotland from Late Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages. Virtually no direct attestations of Pictish remain, short of a limited number of toponymy|geographical and anthroponymy|personal names found on monuments and the contemporary records in the area controlled by the Picts#Kings and kingdoms|kingdoms of the Picts, dating to the early medieval period. Such evidence, however, points strongly to the language being an Insular Celtic language related to the Common Brittonic|Brittonic language spoken prior to Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain|Anglo-Saxon settlement in what is now southern Scotland, England, and Wales. The prevailing view in the second half of the 20th century was that Pictish was a non-Indo-European languages|Indo-European language isolate, predating a Gaelic colonisation of Scotland or that a non-Indo-European Pictish and Brittonic Pictish language coexisted. Pictish was replaced by – or subsumed into – Middle Irish|Gaelic in the latter centuries of the Pictish period. During the reign of Donald II of Scotland|Domnall mac Causantín (889–900), outsiders began to refer to the region as the kingdom of Alba rather than the kingdom of the Picts. However, the Pictish language did not disappear suddenly. A process of Gaelicisation (which may have begun generations earlier) was clearly underway during the reigns of Domnall and his successors. By a certain point, probably during the 11th century, all the inhabitants of Alba had become fully Gaelicised Scots, and the Pictish identity was forgotten.; ; ; ; cf. , "passim", representing the "traditional" view. ==Language classification== File:Columba at Bridei's fort.jpg|thumb|Picture by Joseph Ratcliffe Skelton (1865–1927) depicting Columba preaching to Bridei I of the Picts|Bridei, king of Fortriu in 565 The existence of a distinct Pictish language during the Early Middle Ages is attested clearly in Bede's early eighth-century "Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum", which names Pictish as a language distinct from that spoken by the Celtic Britons|Britons, the Gaels|Irish, and the Anglo-Saxons|English.; references to Pictish also at several other points in that text. Bede states that Columba, a Gaels|Gael, used an interpreter during his mission to the Picts. A number of competing theories have been advanced regarding the nature of the Pictish language:  * Pictish was an Insular Celtic languages|insular Celtic language allied to the P-Celtic and Q-Celtic languages|P-Celtic language Common Brittonic|Brittonic (descendants Welsh language|Welsh, Cornish language|Cornish, Cumbric, and Breton language|Breton).  * Pictish was an insular Celtic language allied to the P-Celtic and Q-Celtic languages|Q-Celtic (Goidelic) languages (Irish language|Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx language|Manx).  * Pictish was a Pre-Indo-European languages|pre-Indo-European language, a relic of the Bronze Age. Most modern scholars agree that Pictish was, at the time of the Roman conquest, a branch of the Brittonic language, while a few scholars accept that it was merely 'related' to the Brittonic language. Pictish came under increasing influence from the Goidelic language spoken in Dál Riata from the eighth century until its eventual replacement. Pictish is thought to have influenced the development of modern Scottish Gaelic. This is perhaps most obvious in the contribution of loan words, but, more importantly, Pictish is thought to have influenced the syntax of Scottish Gaelic, which is more similar to Brittonic languages than to Irish.; .  The evidence of toponymy|place names and Anthroponymy|personal names demonstrates that an insular Celtic language related to the more southerly Brittonic languages was formerly spoken in the Pictish area.; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; . The view of Pictish as a P-Celtic language was first proposed in 1582 by George Buchanan (humanist)|George Buchanan, who aligned the language with Gaulish language|Gaulish.All other research into Pictish has been described as a postscript to Buchanan's work. This view may be something of an oversimplification:  offers a short account of the debate;  may be helpful for a broader view. A compatible view was advanced by antiquarian George Chalmers (antiquarian)|George Chalmers in the early 19th century. Chalmers considered that Pictish and Common Brittonic|Brittonic were one and the same, basing his argument on P-Celtic orthography in the List of kings of the Picts|Pictish king lists and in place names predominant in historically Pictish areas. Although demonstrably Celtic-speaking, the exact linguistic affinity of the Roman-era predecessors to the Picts is difficult to securely establish. The personal name "Vepogeni", recorded c. 230 AD, implies that P-Celtic was spoken by at least the Caledonians. File:Calgacus.JPG|left|thumb|Personal names of Roman-era chieftains from the Pictish area, including Calgacus (above) have a Celtic origin.Calgacus ('swordsman') was recorded by Tacitus in his Agricola (book)|"Agricola". Another example is "Argentocoxus" ('steel leg'), recorded by Cassius Dio. See . Celtic scholar Whitley Stokes (scholar)|Whitley Stokes, in a philological study of the Irish annals, concluded that Pictish was closely related to Welsh. This conclusion was supported by philologist Alexander MacBain's analysis of the place and tribe names in Ptolemy's second-century "Geographia". Toponymist William J. Watson|William Watson's exhaustive review of Scottish place names demonstrated convincingly the existence of a dominant P-Celtic language in historically Pictish areas, concluding that the Pictish language was a northern extension of British and that Gaelic was a later introduction from Ireland. William Forbes Skene argued in 1837 that Pictish was a Goidelic language, the ancestor of modern Scottish Gaelic language|Scottish Gaelic. He suggested that Columba's use of an interpreter reflected his preaching to the Picts in Latin, rather than any difference between the Irish and Pictish languages. This view, involving independent settlement of Ireland and Scotland by Goidelic people, obviated an Irish influence in the development of Gaelic Scotland and enjoyed wide popular acceptance in 19th-century Scotland. Skene later revised his view of Pictish, noting that it appeared to share elements of both Goidelic and Brittonic: }} The Picts were under increasing political, social, and linguistic influence from Dál Riata from around the eighth century. The Picts were steadily Gaelicisation|Gaelicised through the latter centuries of the Pictish kingdom, and by the time of the merging of the Pictish and Dál Riatan kingdoms, the Picts were essentially a Gaelic-speaking people. Katherine Forsyth|Forsyth speculates that a period of bilingualism may have outlasted the Pictish kingdom in peripheral areas by several generations. Scottish Gaelic, unlike Irish language|Irish, maintains a substantial corpus of Brittonic loan-words and, moreover, uses a verbal system modelled on the same pattern as Welsh language|Welsh. The traditional Q-Celtic vs P-Celtic model, involving separate migrations of P-Celtic and Q-Celtic speaking settlers into the British Isles, is one of mutual unintelligibility, with the Irish Sea serving as the frontier between the two. However, it is likely that the Insular Celtic languages evolved from a more-or-less unified proto-Celtic language within the British Isles.: See  for alternate views. Divergence between P-Celtic Pictish and Q-Celtic Dalriadan Goidelic was slight enough to allow Picts and Dalriadans to understand each other's language to some degree. Under this scenario, a gradual linguistic convergence is conceivable and even probable given the presence of the Columban Church in Pictland.  File:Brandsbutt stone.jpg|right|thumb|Difficulties in translation of ogham inscriptions, like those found on the Brandsbutt Stone, led to a widely held belief that Pictish was a non-Indo-European language In 1892, John Rhys proposed that Pictish was a non-Indo-European languages|Indo-European language. This opinion was based on the apparently unintelligible ogham inscriptions found in historically Pictish areas (compare ).; . A similar position was taken by Heinrich Zimmer (Celticist)|Heinrich Zimmer, who argued that the Picts' supposedly exotic cultural practices (tattooing and matriliny) were equally non-Indo-European,; see  for a more current view of Pictish matriliny and a pre-Indo-European model was maintained by some well into the 20th century.For example: ; . A modified version of this theory was advanced in an influential 1955 review of Pictish by Kenneth H. Jackson|Kenneth Jackson, who proposed a two-language model: while Pictish was undoubtedly P-Celtic, it may have had a non-Celtic substratum and a second language may have been used for inscriptions. Jackson's hypothesis was framed in the then-current model that a Brittonic elite, identified as the Broch-builders, had migrated from the south of Britain into Pictish territory, dominating a pre-Celtic majority.See, for example, . He used this to reconcile the perceived translational difficulties of Ogham with the overwhelming evidence for a P-Celtic Pictish language. Jackson was content to write off Ogham inscriptions as inherently unintelligible.For a general view, see . Jackson's model became the orthodox position for the latter half of the 20th century. However, it became progressively undermined by advances in understanding of late Iron Age archaeology.;  Celtic interpretations have been suggested for a number of Ogham inscriptions in recent years, though this remains a matter of debate.Compare for example  and   Traditional accounts (now rejected) claimed that the Picts had migrated to Scotland from Scythia, a region that encompassed Eastern Europe and Central Asia.Aeneid 4:146 reads: "Cretesque Dryopesque fremunt pictique Agathyrsi".<br />Servius' commentary states: "Pictique Agathyrsi populi sunt Scythiae, colentes Apollinem hyperboreum, cuius logia, id est responsa, feruntur. 'Picti' autem, non stigmata habentes, sicut gens in Britannia, sed pulchri, hoc est cyanea coma placentes." Which actually states that the Scythian Agathyrsi did "not" "bear marks" like the British, but had blue hair. Buchanan, looking for a Scythian P-Celtic candidate for the ancestral Pict, settled on the Gaulish-speaking Cotini (which he rendered as "Gothuni"), a tribe from the region that is now Slovakia. This was later misunderstood by Robert Sibbald in 1710, who equated "Gothuni" with the Germanic-speaking "Goths". John Pinkerton expanded on this in 1789, claiming that Pictish was the predecessor to Scots language|modern Scots. Pinkerton's arguments were often rambling, bizarre and clearly motivated by his belief that Celts were an inferior people. The theory of a Germanic Pictish language is no longer considered credible.For a discussion of Sibbald's misunderstanding and of Pinkerton's thesis, see . == Linguistic evidence == Linguist Guto Rhys summarized evidence for the Pictish language as amounting to "a few hundred" individual articles of information. Evidence is most numerous in the form of proper nouns, such as place-names in Pictish regions, and personal names borne by Picts according to Scottish, Irish and Anglo-Saxon sources. Other sources include Ogham inscriptions and Pictish words surviving as loans; especially in the Scottish Gaelic language.  Pictish toponyms occur in Scotland north of the River Forth. Distributed from Fife to the Isle of Skye, they are relatively abundant south of the Dornoch Firth but rare in the extreme north.{{cite thesis|last1=Rhys |f ...
