 <br/>Bay of Plenty Region | elevation =  | spring_source=Ōkataina Caldera | coords =  | coords_ref =  | hot_spring_type =Hot spring | height =  | duration =  | frequency =  | discharge =  | temperature = | depth =  | attraction = }} The "Pink and White Terraces" ( and ), were natural wonders of New Zealand. They were reportedly the largest Siliceous sinter|silica sinter deposits on earth. Until recently, they were lost and thought destroyed in the 1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera, while new hydrothermal features formed to the south-west i.e. Waimangu Volcanic Rift Valley. The Pink and White Terraces were formed by upwelling geothermal springs containing a cocktail of silica-saturated, near-neutral pH chloride water. These two world-famous springs were part of a group of hot springs and geysers, chiefly along an easterly ridge named Pinnacle Ridge (or the Steaming Ranges by Mundy). The main tourist attractions included Ngahapu, Ruakiwi, Te Tekapo, Waikanapanapa, Whatapoho, Ngawana, Koingo and Whakaehu. The Pink and the White Terrace springs were around  apart. The White Terraces were at the north-east end of Lake Rotomahana and faced west to north west at the entrance to the Kaiwaka Channel. Te Tarata descended to the lake edge around  below. The Pink Terraces lay four fifths of the way down the lake on the western shore, facing east to south-east. The pink appearance over the mid and upper basins (near the colour of a rainbow trout) was due to antimony and arsenic sulfides, although the Pink Terraces also contained gold in ore-grade concentrations. ==Formation== The Pink and White Terraces were previously thought to be about 1,000 years old. The hydrothermal system which powered them may be up to 7,000 years old. The silica precipitation formed many pools and steps over time. Precipitation occurred by two methods. The ascending foundation over time formed a lip which would trap the descending flow and become level again. This process formed attractive swimming places, both for the shape and for the warm water. When the thermal layers sloped in the other direction away from the geyser, then silica steps formed on the surface. Both types of formation grew as silica-laden water cascaded over them, and the water also enhanced the spectacle. Geologist Ferdinand von Hochstetter wrote after his visit in 1859 that "doubtless thousands of years were required" for their formation. The White Terraces were the larger formation, covering about  and descending over about 50 layers with a drop in elevation of about , and over about . The Pink Terraces descended about  over about . The Pink Terraces started at the top  wide and the bottom layers were about  wide. Tourists preferred to bathe in the upper Pink Terrace pools due to their clarity and the range of temperature and depths. ==History== File:Charles Blomfield - White Terraces, Rotomahana - Google Art Project.jpg|thumb|The "White Terraces" by Charles Blomfield (artist)|Charles Blomfield, 1884 One of the first Europeans to visit Rotomahana was Ernst Dieffenbach. He briefly visited the lake and terraces while on a survey for the New Zealand Company in early June 1841. The description of his visit in his book "Travels in New Zealand" inspired an interest in the Pink and White Terraces by the outside world. The terraces became New Zealand's most famous tourist attraction, sometimes referred to as the Eighth Wonder of the World. New Zealand was still relatively inaccessible to Europeans and passage took several months by ship. The journey from Auckland was typically by steamer to Tauranga, the bridle track to Ohinemutu on Lake Rotorua, by coach to Te Wairoa (village)|Te Wairoa (the home of the missionary the Reverend Seymour Mills Spencer), by canoe across Lake Tarawera, and then on foot or by canoe up and/or down the Kaiwaka Channel; over the hill to the swampy shores of Lake Rotomahana and the terraces. Those who made the journey to the terraces were most frequently well-to-do, young male overseas tourists or officers from the British forces in New Zealand. The list of notable tourists included Sir George Grey in 1849, Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha|Alfred Duke of Edinburgh in 1869, and Victorian novelist Anthony Trollope in 1874. The appearance of the terraces was recorded for posterity by a number of photographers, but as it was before colour photography was invented, their images lack the enticing colour the formations were known for. Several artists drew and painted the terraces before their loss in 1886, most notably Charles Blomfield (artist)|Charles Blomfield who visited on more than one occasion. Their atmospheric views are the main record of the Eighth Wonder of the World. The colour chemistry of the Pink Terraces can be seen today at Waiotapu, where the Champagne Pool is lined with these same colloidal sulfides. Sophia Hinerangi, sometimes known as Te Paea, took over as principal guide from the older Kate Middlemass in the early 1880s. She became recognised as the principal tourist guide of the Pink and White Terraces. Hinerangi observed the disturbances to Lake Tarawera water levels in the days preceding the eruption. In 1885, Alfred Warbrick began guiding, though he was not from Te Tuhourangi. ==Lead up to loss== A number of people mapped and commented on the region before the loss of the terraces. No Māori maps are known. The first colonial sketch map of the lake was by Percy Smith in 1858.Smith, S. P. (1858) `Diary of journey to Taupo Rotorua Rangitikei from Taranaki, 1858’ MS-2015-102, National Library, Wellington, Map. Ferdinand Hochstetter carried out the first topographic and geological survey of the Lake Rotomahana area in 1859, producing four maps of the lake while camped on its shore; culminating in his defining "Method of Squares" (or Grid) lake map of 30/4/1859.Johnston, M. and Nolden, S. (2011) "Travels of Hochstetter and Haast in New Zealand 1858–1860", Nikau Press, Nelson, 336pp.Hochstetter, F. (2013) manuscript survey map of Lake Rotomahana. From Sascha Nolden and Sandy B. Nolden, Hochstetter Collection Basel: Part 3 – New Zealand Maps & Sketches, Mente Corde Manu, Auckland. His lake research was later published in his "Geographic and Geological survey" where the formation of the terraces was also examined. A commissioned map by August Petermann was included in that work and this was considered valid until 2011 when Sascha Nolden discovered Hochstetter's original maps in Switzerland and repatriated them to New Zealand in digital form.Nolden, S. and Nolden, S. (2013) "Hochstetter Collection Basel", 3.5.10),78. In 2017 the Hochstetter and Petermann maps were compared and Petermann's map found defective.Bunn, A. R. (2019) “Hochstetter’s Survey of the Pink and White Terraces: The Final Iteration” Surveying+Spatial, 99, 30-35. Hochstetter's 30/4/1859 map is now considered the more accurate map of Lake Rotomahana.Bunn R (2020) Commentary: Locating Relict Sinter Terrace Sites at Lake Rotomahana, New Zealand, With Ferdinand von Hochstetter’s Legacy Cartography, Historic Maps, and LIDAR. Front. Earth Sci. 8:68. doi: 10.3389/feart.2020.00068 In 1873, Percy Smith (ethnologist)|Percy Smith climbed Mt. Tarawera and gave the impression that the mountain top was rough but showed no sign of volcanic vents. High quality photographs of the terraces were available in Europe by 1875. In March 1881, G. Seelhorst climbed Wahanga dome and the northern end of Ruawahia dome in search of a presumed "falling star" following reports of glowing and smoke from an area behind Wahanga. In 1884, a surveyor named Charles Clayton described the top of Wahanga dome as volcanic with several depressions, one being approximately . ==Loss==  On 10 June 1886, Mount Tarawera erupted. The eruption spread from west of Wahanga dome,  to the north, down to Lake Rotomahana. The volcano belched out hot mud, red hot boulders, and immense clouds of black ash from a  rift that crossed the mountain, passed through the lake, and extended beyond into the Waimangu Volcanic Rift Valley|Waimangu valley. After the eruption, a crater over  in depth encompassed the former site of the terraces. After some years this filled with water to form a new Lake Rotomahana,  higher, ten times larger and deeper than the old lake. Alfred Warbrick|Alfred Patchet Warbrick, a boat builder at Te Wairoa, witnessed the eruption of Mount Tarawera from Maunga Makatiti to the north of Lake Tarawera. Warbrick soon had whaleboats on Lake Tarawera investigating the new landscape; he in time became the chief guide to the post-eruption attractions. Warbrick never accepted that the Pink and Wh ...
