     File:Pornographies of Japan.jpg|300px|thumb|Pornographic magazines on shelves in Japan, 2009 File:New release Adult video displayed in rental video shop 2.jpg|thumb|Chronology of adult videos in Japan|Adult videos in a Japanese rental shop, 2008 File:Hentai manga in Japan 002.jpg|thumb|Hentai manga sold in Japan In Japan, pornography has unique characteristics that readily distinguish it from western pornography. Pornographic films are known as ":ja:アダルトビデオ|adult videos" (AV) in Japan, so Japanese adult videos (JAV), referring to the #Video (JAV)|Japanese pornographic film industry. Animated films are referred to as "hentai" in English, but in Japan the terms ":ja:アダルトアニメ|adult anime" and ":ja:エロティック・アニメーション|erotic animation" (or "ero anime") are used.  In addition to pornographic videos and magazines featuring live actors, there are now categories of pornographic manga and anime (i.e., "hentai"), and pornographic computer games ("eroge"; for both PC and game consoles). Reflecting Japan's views on Sexuality in Japan|sexuality and Culture of Japan|culture, Japanese pornography delves into a wide spectrum of heterosexual, homosexual, and transgender sexual acts in addition to unique Sexual fetishism|fetishes and paraphilias. Starting with erotic stories and Ukiyo-e|wood block prints from before the 20th century, Japanese pornography evolved into distinct subcategories. Partly under attempts to circumvent Japanese laws regarding censorship in Japan#Pornographic censorship|censorship, but also to cater to particular fetishes, actors and producers often feature subject matter that in western pornography had historically been unseen or rarely depicted, and even now is less frequently featured; Bukkake (sex act)|bukkake (group ejaculation), gokkun (consuming semen), omorashi (needing to urinate), and tentacle erotica are a few uniquely Japanese genres of erotica. Lolicon (young girls), shotacon (young boys), and their contribution to the controversy regarding the Legal status of cartoon pornography depicting minors|regulation of cartoon pornography depicting minors has been a major issue concerning child protection, free speech, and public morality both inside and outside Japan. The Japanese Penal Code from the early 20th century has provisions against "indecent material", so any lawfully produced pornography must censor the genitals of actors and actresses;  this type of censorship also extends to the graphics of hentai manga, video games, and anime.  Up until the mid-1990s, any depiction of pubic hair was also censored.  Anuses are only censored at contact or penetration. Breasts and nipples are not censored. Pixelization is commonly used to follow the censorship guidelines without being too obvious. ==History==  Shunga (art)|Shunga or pornographic wood-block pictures were printed with all imaginable situations. The actual uses of shunga in the period are still debated, but probably resembled modern uses of pornographic materials, including masturbation and shared viewing with a lover. Several notable woodblock artists to produce this and their creations were Hokusai's "The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife, Lesbian" and "Two Lovers" as well as Utamaro|Kitagawa Utamaro's "Client Lubricating a Prostitute." One of the most well-known collection of Shunga can be seen in Kunisada's 1850 work "A Bedside Guide to the Colours of Love in Spring." After the Meiji Restoration in the second half of the 19th century, the publication of pornographic materials declined under government pressure.  In the late Taishō period and early Shōwa period, an artistic movement called "Ero guro|Eroguronansensu", literally "erotic-grotesque-nonsense", occurred influenced by decadence works of Europe. Open sexual expressions were permitted in novels and "manga" but a strict control was applied on photographs and films. After World War II, the law against 'obscenity', Article 175, was the only official censorship law that remained in force. During the Occupation of Japan|Allied occupation of Japan, which lasted until 1952, all forms of sexually explicit material were prohibited in the country. American forces occupying Japan imposed Western ideas of morality and law. The Japanese public slowly came to adopt some of these ideas and practices. Negative ideas of pornography, which was foreign to Japanese culture, were accepted and applied to visual depictions as they were the ones most likely recognized and thereby criticized by Westerners. As a result, once the occupation forces left, the Japanese government kept the ban on sexually explicit material in place until the late 1980s; images or depictions of frontal nudity were banned, as well as pictures of pubic hair or genitals. No sex act could be depicted graphically. Sex work was outlawed in Japan in 1958. Influenced by magazines like "Playboy", pornographic magazines were printed soon after World War II. "Playboy"s articles being about Society of the United States|American lifestyle, women being mostly non-Asian, interviews being with people largely unknown in Japan, and fashion and sport being American spawned a fashion for a genre known as "yōmono" (literally "Western things"). In the early 1960s, several movie studios began producing "pink films". With censorship laws prohibiting genitals from being seen but otherwise free to express anything, these movies quickly diversified to fill all genres, including rape and bondage. Throughout the 1960s, the "pink films" were mainly produced by low-budget, independent filmmakers such as Kōji Wakamatsu. In 1971, the major studio Nikkatsu entered the pink film genre. Starting in 1971, homosexually-oriented magazines began to appear, including "Barazoku". Homosexual magazines tend to be tailored to particular segments of the population, such as "Badi (magazine)|Badi", which features younger adult males, "Samson (magazine)|Samson", devoted to chubby men, and "G-men (magazine)|G-men", featuring muscular men. The 1976 Japanese love film "In the Realm of the Senses" by Nagisa Ōshima was banned from Japan due to its nudity and erotic content. Despite quickly becoming a sensation at film festivals in New York and Cannes, in October 1976 the film was seized by Japanese authorities. The film was based on a true story well known in Japan, its content, involving the vivid depiction of asphixiophilia, was considered too obscene for public viewing in Japan. The producer and script writer for the film were taken to court and charged with obscenity but were found not guilty. Frontal nudity was not permitted to appear on film in Japan until 1986. = The proliferation of pornographic videos in the 1980s commonly called A/V (short for adult video) sold more videos because most Japanese families now had at least two television sets and VCRs. It is rumored, but not substantiated, that VHS became popular over Betamax format because large numbers of A/V were released in VHS format. Few A/Vs were sold in laserdisc format. Playing games on personal computers with no limitation on content except for censorship laws was sometimes viewed as being synonymous with playing bishōjo games, because so few Japanese people saw any reason to play video games on these platforms, as opposed to video game consoles. In the late 1980s, the dōjinshi market expanded. It is estimated that about half of this market consists of pornography. Copyright problems plague the market, yet the dōjinshi market was a common place for one to start before making a debut in a professional magazine. Yaoi began in the dōjinshi market. = According to John Carr, a United Kingdom government adviser on Internet safety policy for children, two-thirds of all pedophilic images on the Internet in the late 1990s may have originated in Japan. He further commented, "We think that child pornography, in any form, promotes values and sends the message that it is OK to sexually abuse children. It helps pedophiles to justify their ideas or behavior and it desensitizes society as a whole." Since the law against child pornography in 1999, the proportion is now believed to be less than 2%. ECPAT believes that many child pornography producers have simply turned to producing anime or films featuring adults dressed as children.  During the COVID-19 lockdowns, global viewership for Japanese pornography rose significantly as more people were forced to stay home. The sale of videos, sex toys, and even subtitles rose significantly in sales during this period. At the same time, the use of VR goggles has shot up during this period, mainly due to the increase in available content and faster internet speeds. JAV Subtitled |url=https://javsubtitled.com/videos/category/vr-exclusive |access-date=2022-10-14 |website=Virtual Reality (VR) Japanese Adult Videos List  JAV Subtitled |language=en}} With the Japanese porn industry growing, more and more women in the country have become victims of sexual exploitation. Many were tricked into believing they were signing up for 'modelling contracts', only to be coerced into becoming pornography actresses. This continuous occurrences have led to calls for greater regulation in the industry. In September 2022, one of the largest Japanese adult video distribution websites, R18.com, announced that they will be closing down permanently effective 1st January 2023 due to billing issues. JAV Films Blog |language=en}} The company's Japanese website, DMM.com, will still remain operational, although international payments have been restricted. In June 2022, the Japanese government passed a bill that made pornography legal in the country. The new set of laws also aims to protect actors who were pressured into entering the industry, by giving them rights to prohibit the sale of videos in which they appear after five years from initial release date. Retrieved 29 December 2017  This has led to many production companies to go out of business. ==Considerations==   Under Article 175 of the Criminal Code of Japan people who sell or distribute obscene materials can be punished by fines or imprisonment. Article 175 was included in the original document in 1907 and remains relatively unchanged., translated into English by the Cabinet Secretariat (Japan)|Japanese Cabinet Secretariat Showing pubic hair and adult genitalia was once considered obscene.<ref name=&qu ...
