 File:Albrecht Dürer - Adam and Eve (Prado) 2.jpg|400px|thumb|right|Albrecht Dürer, "Adam and Eve (Dürer)|Adam and Eve" in the Prado Museum, 1507 File:eyck.hubert.lamb.750pix.jpg|400px|thumb|right|Jan van Eyck, "The Ghent Altarpiece: The Adoration of the Mystic Lamb" (interior view), 1432 File:Tiziano - Amor Sacro y Amor Profano (Galería Borghese, Roma, 1514).jpg|thumb|right|400px|Titian, "Sacred and Profane Love", c. 1513 – 1514, Galleria Borghese, Rome File:Piero della Francesca - Baptism of Christ - WGA17595.jpg|thumb|Piero della Francesca, "The Baptism of Christ (Piero della Francesca)|Baptism of Christ", c. 1450, National Gallery, London "Renaissance art" (1350 – 1620 AD) is the painting, sculpture, and decorative arts of the period of European history known as the Renaissance, which emerged as a distinct style in Italy in about AD 1400, in parallel with developments which occurred in Renaissance philosophy|philosophy, Renaissance literature|literature, Renaissance music|music, Renaissance science|science, and Renaissance technology|technology. Renaissance art took as its foundation the art of Classical antiquity, perceived as the noblest of ancient traditions, but transformed that tradition by absorbing recent developments in the art of Northern Europe and by applying contemporary scientific knowledge. Along with Renaissance humanism|Renaissance humanist philosophy, it spread throughout Europe, affecting both artists and their patrons with the development of new techniques and new artistic sensibilities. For art history|art historians, Renaissance art marks the transition of Europe from the medieval period to the Early Modern age. File:Sandro Botticelli - La nascita di Venere - Google Art Project - edited.jpg|thumb|400px|Sandro Botticelli, "The Birth of Venus", c. 1485, Uffizi, Florence The body of art, painting, sculpture, architecture, music and literature identified as "Renaissance art" was primarily produced during the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries in Europe under the combined influences of an increased awareness of nature, a revival of classical learning, and a more individualistic view of man. Scholars no longer believe that the Renaissance marked an abrupt break with medieval values, as is suggested by the French word "renaissance", literally meaning "rebirth". In many parts of Europe, Early Renaissance art was created in parallel with Gothic art|Late Medieval art. ==Origins== Many influences on the development of Renaissance men and women in the early 15th century have been credited with the emergence of Renaissance art; they are the same as those that affected philosophy, literature, architecture, theology, science, government and other aspects of society. The following list presents a summary of changes to social and cultural conditions which have been identified as factors which contributed to the development of Renaissance art. Each is dealt with more fully in the main articles cited above. The scholars of Renaissance period focused on present life and ways improve human life. They did not pay much attention to medieval philosophy or religion. During this period, scholars and humanists like Erasmus, Dante and Petrarch criticized superstitious beliefs and also questioned them.  The concept of education also widened its spectrum and focused more on creating 'an ideal man' who would have a fair understanding of arts, music, poetry and literature and would have the ability to appreciate these aspects of life. During this period, there emerged a scientific outlook which helped people question the needless rituals of the church.  * Classical texts, lost to European scholars for centuries, became available. These included documents of philosophy, prose, poetry, drama, science, a thesis on the arts, and early Christian theology. * Europe gained access to advanced mathematics, which had its provenance in the works of Islamic scholars. * The advent of Movable type|movable type printing in the 15th century meant that ideas could be disseminated easily, and an increasing number of books were written for a broader public. * The establishment of the Medici Bank and the subsequent trade it generated brought unprecedented wealth to a single Italian city, Florence. * Cosimo de' Medici set a new standard for patronage of the arts, not associated with the church or monarchy. * Renaissance humanism|Humanist philosophy meant that man's relationship with humanity, the universe and God was no longer the exclusive province of the church. * A revived interest in the Classical literature|Classics brought about the first archaeological study of Ancient Rome|Roman remains by the architect Filippo Brunelleschi|Brunelleschi and sculptor Donatello. The revival of a style of architecture based on classical precedents inspired a corresponding classicism in painting and sculpture, which manifested itself as early as the 1420s in the paintings of Masaccio and Paolo Uccello|Uccello. * The improvement of oil paint and developments in oil-painting technique by Belgian artists such as Robert Campin, Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden and Hugo van der Goes led to its adoption in Italy from about 1475 and had ultimately lasting effects on painting practices worldwide. * The serendipity|serendipitous presence within the region of Florence in the early 15th century of certain individuals of artistic genius, most notably Masaccio, Brunelleschi, Lorenzo Ghiberti|Ghiberti, Piero della Francesca, Donatello and Michelozzo formed an ethos out of which sprang the great masters of the High Renaissance, as well as supporting and encouraging many lesser artists to achieve work of extraordinary quality.Frederick Hartt, "A History of Italian Renaissance Art", (1970) * A similar heritage of artistic achievement occurred in Venice through the talented Jacopo Bellini|Bellini family, their influential in-law Andrea Mantegna|Mantegna, Giorgione, Titian and Tintoretto.Michael Baxandall, "Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy", (1974)Margaret Aston, "The Fifteenth Century, the Prospect of Europe", (1979) * The publication of two treatises by Leone Battista Alberti, "De pictura" ("On Painting") in 1435 and "De re aedificatoria" ("Ten Books on Architecture") in 1452. ==History==  File:Giotto - Scrovegni - -36- - Lamentation (The Mourning of Christ) adj.jpg|thumb|Giotto: "The Lamentation", c. 1305, Scrovegni Chapel, foreshadows the Renaissance.|alt= Square fresco. In a shallow space like a stage set, lifelike figures gather around the dead body of Jesus. All are mourning. Mary Magdalene weeps over his feet. A male disciple throws out his arms in despair. Joseph of Arimethea holds the shroud. In Heaven, small angels are shrieking and tearing their hair.  In Italy in the late 13th and early 14th centuries, the sculpture of Nicola Pisano and his son Giovanni Pisano, working at Pisa, Siena and Pistoia shows markedly classicising tendencies, probably influenced by the familiarity of these artists with ancient Roman Sarcophagus|sarcophagi. Their masterpieces are the pulpits of the Baptistery and Pisa Cathedral|Cathedral of Pisa.  Contemporary with Giovanni Pisano, the Florentine painter Giotto developed a manner of figurative painting that was unprecedentedly naturalistic, three-dimensional, lifelike and classicist, when compared with that of his contemporaries and teacher Cimabue. Giotto, whose greatest work is the cycle of the "Life of Christ" at the Arena Chapel in Padua, was seen by the 16th-century biographer Giorgio Vasari as "rescuing and restoring art" from the "crude, traditional, Byzantine style" prevalent in Italy in the 13th century.   File:Donatello - David - Florença.jpg|thumb|Donatello, "David (Donatello)|David" (1440s?) Museo Nazionale del Bargello. Although both the Pisanos and Giotto had students and followers, the first truly Renaissance artists were not to emerge in Florence until 1401 with the competition to sculpt a set of Florence Baptistry#Lorenzo Ghiberti|bronze doors of the Baptistery of Florence Cathedral, which drew entries from seven young sculptors including Filippo Brunelleschi|Brunelleschi, Donatello and the winner, Lorenzo Ghiberti. Brunelleschi, most famous as the architect of the dome of Florence Cathedral and the San Lorenzo, Florence|Church of San Lorenzo, created a number of sculptural works, including a life-sized crucifix in Santa Maria Novella, renowned for its Realism (arts)|naturalism. His studies of perspective are thought to have influenced the painter Masaccio. Donatello became renowned as the greatest sculptor of the Early Renaissance, his masterpieces being his humanist and unusually erotic statue of David (Bible)|David, one of the icons of the Republic of Florence|Florentine republic, and his great monument to Gattamelata, the first large equestrian bronze to be created since Roman times. The contemporary of Donatello, Masaccio, was the painterly descendant of Giotto and began the Early Renaissance in Italian painting in 1425, furthering the trend towards solidity of form and naturalism of face and gesture that Giotto had begun a century earlier. From 1425–1428, Masaccio completed several panel paintings but is best known for the fresco cycle that he began in the Brancacci Chapel with the older artist Masolino da Panicale|Masolino and which had profound influence on later painters, including Michelangelo. Masaccio's developments were carried forward in the paintings of Fra Angelico, particularly in his frescos at the Convent of San Marco in Florence. The treatment of the elements of perspective and light in painting was of particular concern to 15th-century Florentine painters. Paolo Uccello|Uccello was so obsessed with trying to achieve an appearance of perspective that, according to Giorgio Vasari, it disturbed his sleep. His solutions can be seen in his masterpiece set of three paintings, the Battle of San Romano, which is believed to have been completed by 1460. Piero della Francesca made systematic and scientific studies of both light and linear perspective, the results of which can be seen in his fresco cycle of "The History of the True Cross" in Basilica of San Francesco, Arezzo|San Francesco, Arezzo. In Naples, the painter Antonello da Messina began using oil paints for portraits and religious paintings at a date that preceded other Italian painters, possibly about 1450. He carried this technique north and influenced the painters of Venetian painting|Venice. One of the most significant painters of Northern Italy was Andrea Mantegna, who decorated the interior of a room, the Camera degli Sposi for his patron Ludovico III Gonzaga|Ludovico Gonzaga, setting portraits of the family and court into an Illusionism (art)|illusionistic architectural space. The end period of the Early Renaissance in Italian art is marked, like its beginning, by a particular commission that drew artists together, this time in cooperation rather than competition. Pope Sixtus IV had rebuilt the Papal Chapel, named the Sistine Chapel in his honour, and commissioned a group of artists, Sandro Botticelli, Pietro Perugino, Domenico Ghirlandaio and Cosimo Rosselli to decorate its wall with fresco cycles depicting the Life of Christ in art|Life of Christ and the Life of Moses. In the sixteen large paintings, the artists, although each working in his individual style, agreed on principles of format, and utilised the techniques of lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, anatomy, foreshortening and characterisation that had been carried to a high point in the large Florentine studios of Ghiberti, Verrocchio, Ghirlandaio and Perugino. Image:Jean Fouquet.png|thumb|Jean Fouquet, self-portrait (1450). The earliest portrait miniature, and possibly the earliest formal self-portrait.   File:El Descendimiento, by Rogier van der Weyden, from Prado in Google Earth.jpg|thumb|left|Rogier van der Weyden, "The Descent from the Cross (Rogier van der Weyden)|The Descent from the Cross" (c. 1435), oil on oak panel, . Museo del Prado, Madrid. The painters of the Netherlands (terminology)|Low Countries in this period included Jan van Eyck, his brother Hubert van Eyck, Robert Campin, Hans Memling, Rogier van der Weyden and Hugo van der Goes. Their painting developed partly independently of Early Italian Renaissance painting, and without the influence of a deliberate and conscious striving to revive antiquity. The style of painting grew directly out of medieval painting in tempera, on panels and illuminated manuscripts, and other forms such as stained glass; the medium of fresco was less common in northern Europe. The medium used was oil paint, which had long been utilised for painting leather ceremonial shields and accoutrements because it was flexible and relatively durable. The earliest Netherlandish oil paintings are meticulous and detailed like tempera paintings. The material lent itself to the depiction of tonal variations and texture, so facilitating the observation of nature in great detail. The Netherlandish painters did not approach the creation of a picture through a framework of linear perspective and correct proportion. They maintained a medieval view of hierarchical proportion and religious symbolism, while delighting in a realistic treatment of material elements, both natural and man-made. Jan van Eyck, with his brother Hubert, painted "Ghent Altarpiece|The Altarpiece of the Mystical Lamb". It is probable that Antonello da Messina became familiar with Van Eyck's work, while in Naples or Sicily. In 1475, Hugo van der Goes' "Portinari Altarpiece" arrived in Florence, where it was to have a profound influence on many painters, most immediately Domenico Ghirlandaio, who painted an altarpiece imitating its elements. A very significant Netherlandish painter towards the end of the period was Hieronymus Bosch, who employed the type of fanciful forms that were often utilized to decorate borders and letters in illuminated manuscripts, combining plant and animal forms with architectonic ones. When taken from the context of the illumination and peopled with humans, these forms give Bosch's paintings a surreal quality which have no parallel in the work of any other Renaissance painter. His masterpiece is the triptych "The Garden of Earthly Delights".   File:Hey Moulins Triptych.jpg|thumb|294x294px|Jean Hey, "Th ...
