    |length=   |part_length=  |width=   |height=  |diameter=   |crew=   <!-- Explosive specifications -->  |filling= amatol explosive, armour-piercing  |filling_weight=    |detonation=  |yield=  <!-- Vehicle/missile specifications -->  |armour=  |primary_armament=  |secondary_armament=  |engine=  |engine_power=  |transmission=  |payload_capacity=  amatol, armour-piercing  |fuel_capacity=  |pw_ratio=  |suspension=  |clearance=  |vehicle_range=   |speed=    |guidance= Kehl-Straßburg FuG 203/230; MCLOS  }} "Fritz X" was the most common name for a Nazi Germany|German guided anti-ship glide bomb used during World War II. "Fritz X" was the world's first precision guided weapon deployed in combat and the first to sink a ship in combat. "Fritz X" was a nickname used both by Allied and "Luftwaffe" personnel. Alternative names include "Ruhrstahl SD 1400 X", "Kramer X-1", "PC 1400X" or "FX 1400" (the latter, along with the unguided PC 1400 "Fritz" nickname, is the origin for the name "Fritz X"). == History == File:Pc1400.jpg|thumb|American drawing of the "PC 1400" armour-piercing bomb, the basis for the Fritz X PGM|alt=|223x223px "Fritz X" was a further development of the PC 1400 ("Panzersprengbombe, Cylindrisch" 1,400&nbsp;kg):de:Deutsche Abwurfmunition des Zweiten Weltkrieges#Panzersprengbombe (PC und PD)|German Wikipedia's WW II PC-series bomb specifications, German for "armor-piercing bomb, cylindrical". armour-piercing high-explosive bomb, itself bearing the nickname "Fritz". It was a penetration weapon intended to be used against armored targets such as heavy cruisers and battleships. It was given a more aerodynamic nose, four stub wings, and a box-shaped tail unit consisting of a roughly 12-sided annular set of fixed surfaces and a cruciform tail with thick surfaces within the annulus, which contained the "Fritz X"s aerodynamic controls. The "Luftwaffe" recognized the difficulty of hitting moving ships during the Spanish Civil War.Fitzsimons, Bernard, ed. "Fritz-X", in "The Illustrated Encyclopedia of 20th Century Weapons and Warfare" (London: Phoebus, 1978), Volume 10, p. 1037.  "Dipl. engineer" Max Kramer, who worked at the "Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt" ("DVL") had been experimenting since 1938 with remote-controlled free-falling  bombs and in 1939 fitted radio-controlled Spoiler (aeronautics)|spoilers.Fitzsimons, "Fritz-X", p. 1037. In 1940,  was invited to join the development, since they already had experience in the development and production of unguided bombs.Christopher, John. "The Race for Hitler's X-Planes" (The Mill, Gloucestershire:  History Press, 2013), p. 134. "Fritz X" was guided by a Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link, which sent signals to the movable spoilers in the thick vertical and horizontal tail fin surfaces, within the annular tail fin structure. This control system was also used for the unarmored, rocket-boosted Henschel Hs 293 anti-ship ordnance, itself first deployed on 25 August 1943. The "Straßburg" receiver antenna installations on the "Fritz X" were aerodynamically integrated into the trailing edge of the annular surfaces of the tail fin, non-metallically encapsulated within a quartet of "bulged" sections in the trailing edge. This design feature of the "FuG" 230 "Straßburg" receiver installation is not entirely unlike the Azon (US contemporary guided bomb), which had its own receiving antennas placed in the quartet of diagonal struts bracing the fixed sections of its tail fins. Minimum launch height was  – although  was preferred – and a range of  was necessary.Christopher, p.134. As it was an MCLOS-guidance ordnance design, the operator had to keep the bomb in sight at all times (a tail flare was provided, as with the Azon, to assist the operator in tracking the weapon) and the control aircraft had to hold course, which made evading gunfire or fighters impossible. Approximately 1,400 examples, including trial models, were produced. == Control setup == File:Fritz X.jpg|thumb|Fritz X schematic The Fritz X possessed a spoiler-based control setup on its tailfin unit, using three sets of aerodynamic control spoiler systems, with two of them giving the ordnance control in both the pitch and yaw axes, differentially operating and constantly oscillating rapidly under direct control from the "Kehl-Straßburg" radio control link. The roll control setup, operating autonomously and not under control from the deploying aircraft, similarly oscillated to those under the externally controlled sets and were located on the outboard sections of the horizontal tailfin surfaces within the annular set of outer tailfin surfaces. These were like the American Azon ordnance's own "aileron" control surfaces in their purpose, commanded by an internal gyroscope in the tail's central housing in both the Azon and Fritz X, to keep the ordnance level during its trajectory.  The inboard set of spoiler surfaces in the tailfin's horizontal surfaces, which used a set of wing fence-like flat surfaces for airflow separation from the autonomous roll control spoilers, controlled the pitch angle after release and were controlled by the radio control link, giving the Fritz X's bombardier in the deploying aircraft the ability to control the range of the drop, a capability that the Azon ordnance did not have.  The yaw control spoilers housed in the vertical tailfin surfaces were also under control through the radio link, and had similar "fence" surfaces to guide airflow over them.  All three spoiler surface sets, when deployed, barely protruded from the surface during operation, with the pair of spoiler systems under external control having a degree of "proportionality" in their operation by varying the "dwell time" spent on one side or the other during their rapid rate of oscillation from side to side when a control input was sent to them. == Combat procedure == File:Fritz-X Tail Control Setup.jpg|thumb|left|Annotated still from a 1946 USAAF-published film on Fritz X showing the location of control spoilers and autonomous roll gyro The Fritz X was steered by the bombardier in the launching aircraft over a radio link between the aircraft's "Kehl" transmitter and the weapon's "Straßburg" receiver. The bombardier had to be able to see the target at all times, and like the Azon ordnance, the Fritz X bomb had a flare in the tail so it could be seen from the controlling aircraft for its MCLOS-form guidance to control it properly. The disadvantage with this — in comparison to fully autonomous-guidance glide bombs like the operational Bat (guided bomb)|U.S. Navy's "Bat" radar-homing glide bomb, used against Japan in 1944–45 — were that the aircraft had to be flown toward the target on a steady course and that as the missile neared its target it became possible to misguide by jamming its radio channel. Unlike the Hs 293, which was deployed against merchant ships and light escorting warships, the Fritz X was intended to be used against armoured ships such as heavy cruisers and battleships. The Fritz X had to be released at least  from the target. The plane had to decelerate immediately after bomb release so the bombardier could see the bomb and guide it; this deceleration was achieved by making a steep climb and then levelling out. The bombardier could make a maximum correction of  in range and  in bearing. The bomber was vulnerable to fighter attack as well as ship-based air defense weapons while maintaining a slow, steady course so the bombardier could maintain visual contact to guide the bomb.Bogart, Charles H. "German Remotely Piloted Bombs" "United States Naval Institute Proceedings" November 1976 pp.62–68  When working properly, the missile was able to pierce 130&nbsp;mm (5.1&nbsp;in) of armor. Accuracy is the main reason for developing a weapon system of this kind, rather than continuing to use so-called Unguided bomb|"dumb bombs". A skilled bombardier could manage to guide 50% of the bombs to within a 15&nbsp;m (50&nbsp;ft) radius of the aiming point, and about 90% hit within a 30&nbsp;m (100&nbsp;ft) radius (other sources say 60% hits within 4.6 metre radius). == Usage in combat == File:Fritz X guided bomb USAFM.jpg|thumb|Fritz X guided bomb at the National Museum of the United States Air Force The only Luftwaffe unit to deploy the Fritz X was "Gruppe" III of Kampfgeschwader 100|"Kampfgeschwader" 100 "Wiking" (Viking), designated III./KG 100; the bomber wing itself evolved as the larger-sized descendant of the earlier "Kampfgruppe 100" unit in mid-December 1941. This unit employed the medium range Dornier Do 217K-2 bomber on almost all of its attack missions, though, in a few cases toward the end of its deployment history, Dornier Do 217K-3 and M-11 variants were also used.  The Fritz X had been initially tested with a Heinkel He 111 bomber, although it was never taken into combat by this aircraft. A few special variants of the troublesome Heinkel He 177A "Greif" long-range bomber were equipped with the "Kehl" transmitter and proper bombracks to carry the Fritz X, and it is thought that this combination might have seen limited combat service, at least with the combinations known to have been involved in test drops. It was found that the launch aircraft had to "toss" the bomb slightly, climbing and then descending, to keep it in view ahead. The Fritz X was first deployed on 21 July 1943 in a raid on Augusta, Sicily|Augusta harbour in Sicily. A number of additional attacks around Sicily and Messina followed, though no confirmed hits were made and it appears the Allies were unaware that the large bombs being dropped were radio-guided weapons.RL 10/493: Tätigkeitsbericht über Einsatzperiode das K.G. 100 mit F.K. in der Zeit von 12.7.43 – 30.4.44.   On 9 September, the "Luftwaffe" achieved their greatest success with the weapon. After Pietro Badoglio publicly announced the Armistice between Italy and Allied armed forces|Italian armistice with the Allies on 8 September 1943, the Italian fleet had steamed out from La Spezia and headed to Tunisia. To prevent the ships from falling into Allied hands, six Do 217K-2s from III. "Gruppe" of KG 100 (III/KG 100) took off, each carrying a single Fritz X. The Italian battleship , flagship of the Italian fleet, received two hits and one near miss, and sank after her Magazine (artillery)|magazines exploded. 1,393 men, including Admiral Carlo Bergamini (admiral)|Carlo Bergamini, died. Her sister ship, Italian battleship Littorio|"Italia", was also seriously damaged but reached Tunisia. The American light cruiser  was hit by Fritz Xs at 10:00 AM on 11 September 1943 during Operation Avalanche (World War II)|the invasion of Salerno, and was forced to retire to the United States for eight months of repairs. A single Fritz X passed through the roof of "C" turret and killed the turret crew and a damage control party when it exploded in the lower ammunition-handling room. The blast tore a large hole in the ship's bottom, opened a seam in her side, and blew out all fires in her boiler rooms. "Savannah" lay dead in the water with her forecastle nearly awash, and eight hours elapsed before her boilers were relit, allowing the "Savannah" to get under way for Malta. USS "Savannah" lost 197 crewmen in this attack. Fifteen other sailors were seriously wounded, and four more were trapped in a watertight compartment for 60 hours. These four sailors were not rescued until "Savannah" had already arrived at Grand Harbor, Valletta, Malta on 12 September. File:FRITZ X.jpg|thumb|right|Rear view "Savannah"s sister ship, , had been targeted earlier that same morning. While it is often believed that the ship was hit by a Fritz X, in fact the bomb just missed the ship, exploding about 15 meters away. Damage was minimal.See Barbara Tomblin's With "Utmost Spirit: Allied Naval Operations in the Mediterranean, 1942–45" (Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 2004), 273. Tomblin cites as her source the original action reports filed by "Philadelphia" which clearly indicate the bomb missed. The erroneous notion that "Philadelphia" was hit emerged from an article in "Proceedings" in 1976 by Charles Bogart, and was subsequently repeated. The Royal Navy's light cruiser  was hit by a Fritz X off Salerno at 14:40 on 13 September. The Fritz X passed through seven decks and straight through her keel, exploding underwater just under th ...
