        "Festivals in ancient Rome" were a very important part in  religion in ancient Rome|Roman religious life during both the Roman Republic|Republican and Roman Empire|Imperial eras, and one of the primary features of the Roman calendar. ""Feriae"" ("holidays" in the sense of "holy days"; singular also "feriae" or ""dies ferialis"") were either public "(publicae)" or private "(privatus|privatae)". State holidays were celebrated by the Roman people and received public funding. Games "(ludi)", such as the Ludi Apollinares, were not technically "feriae", but the days on which they were celebrated were "Glossary of ancient Roman religion#festus|dies festi", holidays in the modern sense of days off work. Although "feriae" were paid for by the state, "ludi" were often funded by wealthy individuals. "Feriae privatae" were holidays celebrated in honor of private individuals or by families.H.H. Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic" (Cornell University Press, 1981), pp. 38–39. This article deals only with public holidays, including rites celebrated by the state priests of Rome at temples, as well as celebrations by neighborhoods, families, and friends held simultaneously throughout Rome. "Feriae publicae" were of three kinds: * "Stativae" were annual holidays that held a fixed or stable date on the calendar. * "Conceptivae" were annual holidays that were moveable feasts (like Easter on the Christian calendar, or Thanksgiving in North America); the date was announced by the Roman Magistrates|magistrates or College of Pontiffs|priests who were responsible for them. * "#Feriae imperativae|Imperativae" were holidays held "on demand" (from the verb "impero, imperare", "to order, command") when special celebrations or expiations were called for.Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic," p. 39. One of the most important sources for Roman holidays is Ovid's "Fasti (poem)|Fasti", an incomplete poem that describes and provides origins for festivals from January to June at the time of Augustus. ==Keeping the "feriae"== Varro defined "feriae" as "days instituted for the sake of the gods."Varro, "De lingua latina" 6.12 "(dies deorum causa instituti", as cited by Scullard, p. 39, noting also the phrase "dis dedicati", "dedicated to the gods," in Macrobius, "Saturnalia" 1.16.2. Religious rites were performed on the "feriae", and public business was suspended. Even slavery in ancient Rome|slaves were supposed to be given some form of rest. Cicero says specifically that people who were free should not engage in lawsuits and quarrels, and slaves should get a break from their labours.Cicero, "De legibus" 2.29, as cited by Scullard, p. 39. Roman agriculture|Agricultural writers recognized that some jobs on a farm might still need to be performed, and specified what these were. Some agricultural tasks not otherwise permitted could be carried out if an expiation were made in advance "(piaculum)", usually the sacrifice of a puppy.Cato the Elder, "De agricultura" 138; Columella 2.21.2; Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic," p. 39. Within the city of Rome, the flamens and the priest known as the "Rex sacrorum" were not allowed even to see work done. On a practical level, those who "inadvertently" worked could pay a fine or offer up a "piaculum", usually a pig. Work considered vital either to the gods or preserving human life was excusable, according to some experts on religious law. Although Romans were required not to work, they were not required to take any religious action unless they were priests or had family rites "(sacra gentilicia)" to maintain.Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic," pp. 39–40. ==List of festivals by month== Following is a month-by-month list of Roman festivals and games that had a fixed place on the calendar. For some, the date on which they were first established is recorded. A deity's festival often marked the anniversary ("Glossary of ancient Roman religion#dies natalis|dies natalis," "birthday") of the founding of a temple, or a rededication after a major renovation. Festivals not named for deities are thought to be among the oldest on the calendar.Hendrik Wagenvoort, "Initia Cereris," in "Studies in Roman Literature, Culture and Religion" (Brill, 1956), pp. 163–164. Some religious observances were monthly. The first day of the month was the Kalends (or Calends, from which the English word "calendar" derives). Each Kalends was sacred to Juno (mythology)|Juno, and the "Regina sacrorum" ("Queen of the Rites," a public priestess) marked the day by presiding over a sacrifice to the goddess. Originally a pontiff and the "Rex sacrorum" reported the sighting of the new moon, and the pontiff announced whether the Nones (calendar)|Nones occurred on the 5th or 7th of that month. On the Nones, announcements were made regarding events to take place that month; with the exception of the Poplifugia, no major festivals were held before the Nones, though other ceremonies, such as anniversaries of temple dedications, might be carried out. The Ides (calendar)|Ides (usually the 13th, or in a few months the 15th) were sacred to Jupiter (mythology)|Jupiter. On each Ides, a white lamb was led along the Via Sacra to the Capitolium for sacrifice to Jupiter. The list also includes other notable public religious events such as sacrifices and processions that were observed annually but are neither "feriae" nor "dies natales." Unless otherwise noted, the calendar is that of H.H. Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic".  *1 (Calends): From 153 BC onward, Roman consul|consuls entered office on this date, accompanied by "Vota pro salute rei publicae|vota publica" (public vows for the wellbeing of the republic and later of the emperor) and the taking of auspices. Festivals were also held for the imported cult of Aesculapius and for the obscure god Vediovis.Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic", pp. 52–58. * 3-5: most common dates for Compitalia, a movable feast "(#Feriae conceptivae|feriae conceptivae)" * 5 (Nones): "Dies natalis" (founding day) of the shrine of Vica Pota on the Velian HillRecorded only in the Fasti Antiates. *9: Agonalia in honor of Janus (mythology)|Janus, after whom the month January is named; first of at least four festivals named Agonalia throughout the year *11 and 15: Carmentalia, with Juturna celebrated also on the 11th * 13 (Ides) * 24–26: most common dates for the Sementivae, a "feriae conceptivae" of sowing, perhaps also known as the Paganalia as celebrated by the "pagus|pagi" * 27: "Dies natalis" of the Temple of Castor and Pollux, or perhaps marking its rededication (see also July 15); "Ludi Castores" ("Games of the Castors") celebrated at Ostia Antica|Ostia during the Imperial period  In the archaic Roman calendar, February was the last month of the year. The name derives from "februa", "the means of purification, expiatory offerings." It marked a turn of season, with February 5 the official first day of spring bringing the renewal of agricultural activities after winter.Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic," pp. 70–71. * 1 (Kalends): "Dies natalis" for the Temple of Juno Sospita, Mother and Queen; "sacra" at the Grove of List of Roman deities#A|Alernus, near the Tiber River|Tiber at the foot of the Palatine Hill * 5: "Dies natalis" for the Temple of Concordia on the Capitoline Hill * 13 (Ides): minor festival of Faunus on the Tiber Island * 13–22: Parentalia, a commemoration of ancestors and the dead among families ** 13: Parentatio, with appeasement of the Manes beginning at the 6th hour and ceremonies performed by the chief Vestal Virgin|Vestal; temples were closed, no fires burned on altars, marriages were forbidden, magistrates took off their insignia, until the 21st * 15: Lupercalia * 17: last day of the "feriae conceptivae" Fornacalia, the Oven Festival; Quirinalia, in honour of Quirinus *21: Feralia, the only public observation of the Parentalia, marked F "(dies festus)" in some calendars and FP (a designation of uncertain meaning) in others, with dark rites aimed at the gods below "(di inferi)" * 22: Caristia (or Cara Cognatio, "Dear Kindred"), a potluck meal provided by all the family, and shared in a spirit of love and forgiveness * 23: Terminalia (festival)|Terminalia, in honour of Terminus (mythology)|Terminus * 24: Regifugium *27: Equirria, first of two horse-racing festivals to Mars (mythology)|Mars  In the old Roman calendar (until perhaps as late as 153 BC), the "mensis Martius" ("Mars' Month") was the first month of the year. It is one of the few months to be named for a god, Mars (mythology)|Mars, whose festivals dominate the month. *1 (Kalends): the original New Year's Day when the sacred fire of Rome was renewed; the dancing armed priesthood of the Salii celebrated the "Feriae Marti" (holiday for Mars), which was also the "dies natalis" ("birthday") of Mars; also the Matronalia, in honor of List of Roman birth and childhood deities|Juno Lucina, Mars' mother  * 7: a second festival for Vediovis  * 9: a "Glossary of ancient Roman religion#religiosus|dies religiosus" when the Salii carried the sacred shields "(ancilia)" around the city again *14: the second Equirria, a "Feriae Marti" also called the Mamuralia or "sacrum Mamurio" * 15 (Ides): "Feriae Iovi", sacred to Jove, and also the feast of the year goddess Anna Perenna * 16–17: the procession of the Argei * 17: Liberalia, in honour of Liber; also an Agonalia#Agonium Martiale|Agonalia for Mars * 19: Quinquatrus, later expanded into a five-day holiday as Quinquatria, a "Feriae Marti", but also a feast day for Minerva, possibly because her temple on the Aventine Hill was dedicated on this day * 23: Tubilustrium, purification of the trumpets. * 24: a day marked QRFC, when the Comitia Calata met to sanction wills *31: anniversary of the Luna (Roman goddess)|Temple of Luna on the Aventine  File:Fasti Praenestini Massimo n2.jpg|thumb|Piece of the fragmentary "Fasti Praenestini" for April, showing the Vinalia "(VIN)" and Robigalia "(ROB)" A major "feriae conceptivae" in April was the Feriae Latinae|Latin Festival. * 1 (Kalends): Veneralia in honour of Venus (mythology)|Venus *4–10: Megalesia|Ludi Megalenses or Megalesia, in honor of the Magna Mater or Cybele, whose temple was dedicated April 10, 191 BC * 5: anniversary of the Temple of Fortuna Publica *12–19: Cerealia|Cerialia or Ludi Cereri, festival and games for Ceres (mythology)|Ceres, established by 202 BC * 13 (Ides): anniversary of the Temple of Jupiter Victor *15: Fordicidia, offering of a pregnant cow to Terra Mater|Tellus ("Earth") *21: Parilia, rustic festival in honour of Pales, and the founding of Rome|"dies natalis" of Rome *23: the first of two wine festivals (Vinalia), the "Vinalia Priora" for the previous year's wine, held originally for Jupiter and later Venus *25: Robigalia, an agricultural festival involving dog sacrifice *27 (28 in the Julian calendar) to May 1: Floralia|Ludi Florales in honour of Flora (mythology)|Flora, extended to May 3 under the Empire  The "feriae conceptivae" of this month was the Ambarvalia. *1 (Kalends): Games of Flora continue; sacrifice to Maia (mythology)#Roman Maia|Maia; anniversary of the Temple of Bona Dea on the Aventine; rites for the Lares|Lares Praestites, tutelary deity|tutelaries of the city of Rome * 3: in the Imperial period, a last celebration for Flora, or the anniversary of one of her temples *9, 11, 13: Lemuria (festival)|Lemuria, a festival of the dead with both public and household rites, possibly with a sacrifice to Mania (mythology)|Mania on the 11th * 14: anniversary of the Temple of Mars Invictus (Mars the Unconquered); a second procession of the ArgeiAlternatively dated to May 15. *15 (Ides): Mercuralia, in honor of Mercury (mythology)|Mercury; "Feriae" of Jove *21: one of four Agonalia, probably a third festival for Vediovis  *23: a second Tubilustrium; "Feriae" for Volcanus|Volcanus (Vulcan) * 24: QRCF, following Tubilustrium as in March * 25: anniversary of the Temple of Fortuna Primigenia  Scullard places the Taurian Games on June 25–26,Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic", p. 156. but other scholars doubt these "ludi" had a fixed date or recurred on a regular basis.John H. Humphrey, "Roman Circuses: Arenas for Chariot Racing" (University of California Press, 1986), p. 543; Robert Turcan, "The Gods of Ancient Rome" (Edinburgh University Press, 2000), p. 82. * 1 (Kalends): anniversaries of the Temple of Juno Moneta; of the Temple of Mars on the "clivus" (slope, street) outside the Porta Capena; and possibly of the Temple of the Tempestates (storm goddesses); also a festival of the complex goddess Cardea|Cardea or Carna *3: anniversary of the Temple of Bellona (goddess)|Bellona * 4: anniversary of the restoration of the Temple of Hercules in ancient Rome|Hercules Custos * 5: anniversary of the Temple of Dius Fidius * 7: Ludi Piscatorii, "Fishermen's Games" *7–15: Vestalia, in honour of Vesta (mythology)|Vesta; June 9 was a "dies religiosus" to her * 8: anniversary of the Temple of Mens * 11: Matralia in honour of Mater Matuta; also the anniversary of the Temple of Fortuna in the Forum Boarium * 13 (Ides): "Feriae" of Jove * 13–15: "Quinquatrus minusculae", the lesser Quinquatrus celebrated by "tibicines", flute-players in their role as accompanists to religious ceremonies *19: a commemoration involving the Temple of Minerva on the Aventine, which had its anniversary March 19 *20: anniversary of the Temple of Summanus * 24: festival of Fors Fortuna, which "seems to have been a rowdy affair"Scullard, "Festivals and Ceremonies of the Roman Republic", p. 155. * 27: poorly attested observance in honour of the Lares; anniversary of the Temple of Jupiter Stator * 29: anniversary of the Temple of Hercules in ancient Rome|Hercules Musarum, Hercules of the Muses  Until renamed for Julius Caesar, this month was called Quinctilis or Quintilis, originally the fifth month "(quint-)" when the year began in March. From this point in the calendar forward, the months had numerical designations. * 1 (Kalends): a scarcely attested anniversary of a temple to Juno Felicitas *5: Poplifugia *6–13: Ludi Apollinares, games in honour of Apollo, first held in 212 BC as a one-day event (July 13) and established as annual in 208 BC. * 6: anniversary of the Temple of Fortuna Muliebris * 7 (Nones): Caprotinia|Nonae Caprotinae; "Ancillarum Feriae" (Festival of the Serving Women);Recorded only by Polemius  ...
