  "Sabretooth" ("Victor Creed") is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics, most commonly in association with the X-Men, in particular as an enemy of the mutant Wolverine (character)|Wolverine. Created by writer Chris Claremont and artist John Byrne (comics)|John Byrne, the character made his first appearance in "Iron Fist (comics)|Iron Fist" #14 (August 1977). The original portrayal of Sabretooth was that of a non-powered serial killer, but was later written as a Mutant (Marvel Comics)|mutant possessing bestial superhuman abilities, most notably a rapid healing factor, razor-sharp fangs and claws, and superhuman senses. He is a vicious assassination|assassin, who was responsible for numerous deaths throughout history, both as a paid mercenary and for his personal pleasure. Accounts on how his enmity with Wolverine originated differs depending on different writers. One of the most common accounts is that Wolverine and Sabretooth were both participants of the Cold War supersoldier program Weapon X, and that Sabretooth saw Wolverine as competition and therefore antagonized him. While Wolverine is depicted as suppressing his more savage qualities, Sabretooth does the opposite and embraces them, until the events of the 2014 storyline "AXIS (comics)|AXIS". The character has appeared in several X-Men media. In live-action, it was portrayed by Tyler Mane in the film X-Men (film)|"X-Men" (2000) and by Liev Schreiber in the film "X-Men Origins: Wolverine" (2009). In May 2008, Wizard (magazine)|"Wizard" magazine ranked Sabretooth #193 of the 200 best comic book characters of all time. In 2009, Sabretooth was ranked as IGN's 44th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time. . IGN. ==Publication history== File:Iron Fist vs Sabretooth comic cover.jpg|right|thumb|upright|"Sabre-Tooth" first appeared in "Iron Fist (comics)|Iron Fist" #14. The character first appeared in "Iron Fist (comics)|Iron Fist" #14 (August 1977) and was created by Chris Claremont and John Byrne (comics)|John Byrne. Initially appearing as "the Slasher", Sabretooth was conceived as a recurring antagonist for Iron Fist (comics)|Iron Fist, whom he fights several times. He works for a time with Constrictor (comics)|the Constrictor as a partner-in-crime, and clashes repeatedly with Iron Fist and Luke Cage|Power Man."Power Man and Iron Fist" #66. Marvel Comics."Power Man and Iron Fist" #84. Marvel Comics. Sabretooth also appeared in comics such as "The Spectacular Spider-Man". Chris Claremont introduced him as a minor X-Men villain, a member of Marauders (comics)|the Marauders, during the "Mutant Massacre" crossover in 1986. He rose to greater prominence when he was split off from the Marauders and became a recurring antagonist of an individual member of the X-Men, Wolverine. Sabretooth was subsequently featured in Limited series (comics)|limited series and One-shot (comics)|one-shot Comic book|comics including "Sabretooth and Mystique (comics)|Mystique" and "Sabretooth: In the Red Zone", and even had his own ongoing reprint series in the mid-1990s, "Sabretooth Classics".  Chris Claremont had meant for Sabretooth to be Wolverine's father, though this was contradicted  by subsequent writers. Claremont, when asked what he had intended to be the relationship between Wolverine and Sabretooth, stated: <blockquote>Father and son. That's why Sabretooth always considered Logan "sloppy seconds" to his "original" / "real deal." The other critical element in my presentation of their relationship was that, in their whole life, Logan has never defeated Sabretooth in a knock-down, drag-out, kill-or-be-killed berserker fight. By the same token, on every one of his birthdays, Sabretooth has always managed to find him, no matter where Logan was or what he was doing, and come within an inch of killing him. For no other reason than to remind him that he could.</blockquote> genetics|Genetic tests performed by S.H.I.E.L.D. confirmed that Sabretooth and Wolverine were not father and son."Wolverine" (vol. 2) #42. Marvel Comics. An interviewer asked Paul Jenkins (writer)|Paul Jenkins if Dog Logan was Sabretooth. Jenkins had not intended the speculation, but said would not have a problem with another writer doing this later. The miniseries "Astonishing Spider-Man & Wolverine" has shown that the two characters are not the same person."Astonishing Spider-Man and Wolverine" #6. Marvel Comics. A one-shot specialty comic entitled "X-Men Origins: Sabretooth" chronicling some of the character's earliest childhood experiences, differing distinctly from Dog's life. It is also later shown that Sabretooth and Dog are separate people."Wolverine" (vol. 2) #304. Marvel Comics.  In "X-Men Forever", Chris Claremont's continuation of his run on "X-Men" (non-canonical to the mainstream timeline and taking place in the 161 Marvel Universe), Sabretooth is established as Wolverine's father. He attacks the X-Mansion, but is blinded by Storm. Claremont has stated in an interview that in "X-Men Forever" the original true Sabretooth makes his reappearance after a long time, and that most of the previous appearances of Sabretooth prior to "X-Men Forever" #2, that follows directly after "X-Men" (vol. 2) #3, were that of a weaker Sabretooth clone created by Mister Sinister. The original true Sabretooth reappears dressed in the Jim Lee costume in "X-Men Forever", which would make the weaker clone the one dressed in the John Byrne costume. Claremont claims he always meant for the Sabretooth dressed in the Byrne costume to be later outed as a clone of the original true Sabretooth. Claremont stated: "Speaking specifically of the cast of "X-Men Forever", one character who's becoming more enticing is Sabretooth, in part because (at least as it relates to my conception of him) very little is actually known. They then filled his skeleton with adamantium. At this specific point of his life, readers haven't really seen that much of him over the years, since the Sabes that's shown up most over the time is a less-endowed copy cloned from spare cells by Mr. Sinister." ==Fictional character biography==  Sabretooth's real name is believed to be Victor Creed."X-Men" (vol. 2) #5 (February 1992) Sabretooth's memories have been tampered with by clandestine organizations such as Weapon X and so much of what appears to be his past is not of credible account. The clearest accounts of Victor's childhood begin with him murdering his brother Luther Creed over a piece of pie."X-Men Origins - Sabretooth" His father Zebediah then chains him in the basement like an animal and systematically pulls out Victor's elongated canines, which perennially grow back. Victor begs his mother Victoria to let him go, but she does not. Years pass until Victor eventually gnaws off his own hand to escape the basement and apparently murders his parents. It is, however, later revealed that Sabretooth only killed his father, and took care of his mother financially, visiting her frequently until the woman's death."Wolverine" (vol. 4) #11. Marvel Comics. Victor is revealed to have had a brother named Saul and a sister named Clara who are believed to be the reason for Victor's ongoing feud with the X-Men's Wolverine (character)|Wolverine. Saul Creed was a tracker and hunter, while Clara Creed was an animal handler. They helped track down the feral James "Logan" Howlett for a circus."Origin II" #2. Marvel Comics. They also helped Logan escape after the man was experimented on by Mister Sinister|Nathaniel Essex, and the three go on the run."Origin II" #3. Marvel Comics. Saul perceives Logan to be stealing Clara, leading to Saul tipping Essex off regarding Logan's location. In the ensuing chaos, Logan accidentally kills Clara, although her healing factor later revives Clara. Saul, not knowing this, blames Essex for Clara's death, and the two men seek Essex out, Saul revealing that Clara was his sister."Origin II" #4. Marvel Comics. Logan, however, finds out that Saul betrayed them to Essex, and drowns Saul in a potion of Essex's. Horrified by this, Clara asks Wolverine to never look for her again. Victor was then informed about his brother's death."Origin II" #5. Marvel Comics. In an early tale, Logan lives in a small Blackfoot Confederacy|Blackfoot community. One day, Sabretooth tracks him down in Canada, and seemingly murders his one-time teammate's lover Silver Fox (comics)|Silver Fox on Logan's birthday, after Silver Fox rejects him. In this tale, it is indicated that Logan did not have particularly strong feelings for Silver Fox, and that the murder was simply the last straw in a series of grievances he held against Sabretooth."Wolverine" (vol. 2) #10. Marvel Comics. Creed eventually adopts a tradition of tracking Logan down on his foe's birthday with the intention of fighting.  Creed is recruited into a top secret Central Intelligence Agency|CIA covert operation|covert ops unit known as Team X (comics)|Team X, with allies John Wraith (Kestrel (Marvel Comics)|Kestrel), Logan (Wolverine), Silver Fox (whose death was a hoax), and David North (David North (comics)|Maverick). On one mission, the psychopathic Sabretooth kills a crucial scientist during a battle against Russian supersoldier Omega Red, causing Team X to break up."X-Men" (vol. 2) #4-7 During this period he fathers a son, Graydon Creed, with the mutant shapeshifting|shapeshifter Mystique (comics)|Mystique, who is undercover in the guise of a spy named Leni Zauber. Graydon grows up to found Friends of Humanity, an anti-mutant organization, and while running for president is assassinated by Mystique from an alternate future."X-Men Forever" #2. Marvel Comics. After the disbanding of Team X, Logan and Victor meet up again, as friends, when Logan learns of anti-mutant forces within the government. Victor and Logan form a team of rebel mutants, and Victor falls in love with a mutant named Holo. Eventually, Creed grows tired of the fighting and wants to leave with Holo, but she has already decided against it. In the final conflict, Holo is mortally wounded. Creed blames Logan for her death."First X-Men" #1-5. Marvel Comics. Next, Sabretooth is recruited by the Weapon X program, but it is unknown what, if any, enhancements he receives. As part of the program, his memories are tampered with by the psychic mutant Aldo Ferro, also known as Psi-Borg."Sabretooth" #2 (September 1993).  ...
