 File:Mariano Rivera allison 7 29 07.jpg|thumb|250px|Mariano Rivera is the Major League Baseball|MLB all-time leader in saves. In baseball, a "save" (abbreviated "SV" or "S") is credited to a pitcher who List of Major League Baseball leaders in games finished|finishes a game for the winning team under certain prescribed circumstances. Most commonly a pitcher earns a save by entering in the ninth inning of a game in which his team is winning by three or fewer runs and finishing the game by pitching one inning without losing the lead. The number of saves or percentage of save opportunities successfully converted are oft-cited statistics of relief pitchers, particularly those in the closer (baseball)|closer role. The save statistic was created by journalist Jerome Holtzman in 1959 to "measure the effectiveness of relief pitchers" and was adopted as an official Major League Baseball (MLB) statistic in 1969. The save has been retroactively tabulated for pitchers before that date. Mariano Rivera is MLB's all-time leader in regular-season saves with 652, while Francisco Rodríguez (Venezuelan pitcher)|Francisco Rodríguez earned the most saves in a single season with 62 in 2008. ==History== The term "save" was being used as far back as 1952. Executives Jim Toomey of the St. Louis Cardinals, Allan Roth of the Los Angeles Dodgers and Irv Kaze of the Pittsburgh Pirates awarded saves to pitchers who finished winning games but were not credited with the win, regardless of the margin of victory. The statistic went largely unnoticed. A formula with more criteria for saves was invented in 1960 by baseball writer Jerome Holtzman. He felt that the existing statistics at the time, earned run average (ERA) and Win–loss record (pitching)|win–loss record (W-L), did not sufficiently measure a reliever's effectiveness. ERA does not account for inherited runners a reliever allows to score, and W-L record does not account for relievers protecting leads. Elroy Face of the Pittsburgh Pirates was 18–1 in 1959; however, Holtzman wrote that in 10 of the 18 wins, Face allowed the tying or lead run but got the win when the Pirates offense regained the lead. Associated Press also reported Face allowing a tying run to score in his July 9 win over the Chicago Cubs.|group=note}} Holtzman felt that Face was more effective the previous year when he was 5–2. When Holtzman presented the idea to J. G. Taylor Spink, publisher of "The Sporting News", " gave  a $100 bonus. Maybe it was $200." Holtzman recorded the unofficial save statistic in "The Sporting News" weekly for nine years before it became official in 1969. In conjunction with publishing the statistic, "The Sporting News" in 1960 also introduced the Fireman of the Year Award, which was awarded based on a combination of saves and Win (baseball)|wins. The save became an official MLB statistic in . It was MLB's first new major statistic since the run batted in was added in 1920.  On April 7, 1969, Bill Singer was credited with the first official save when he pitched three shutout innings in relief of Don Drysdale in the Los Angeles Dodgers' 3–2 Opening Day victory over the Cincinnati Reds at Crosley Field. On April 27, 1969, Frank Linzy of the San Francisco Giants became the first pitcher to be credited with two saves in one day, registering saves in both games of a Doubleheader (baseball)|doubleheader against the Houston Astros. On April 29, 1970, Stan Williams (baseball)|Stan Williams of the Minnesota Twins became the first pitcher credited with a save without facing a batter. In a home game against the Cleveland Indians with the Twins holding a 1–0 lead, Williams entered in relief of Jim Kaat in the top of the ninth inning with two outs and runners on first and second; he then Pickoff|picked off runner Tony Horton (baseball)|Tony Horton at second base, ending the game. On September 3, 2002, the Texas Rangers (baseball)|Texas Rangers won 7–1 over the Baltimore Orioles as Joaquín Benoit pitched a seven-inning save, the longest save since it had become an official statistic in 1969. Baseball-Reference.com retroactively credited eight-inning saves to pitchers prior to 1969 including Jim Shaw (baseball)|Jim Shaw (1920), Guy Morton (1920), and Dick Hall (baseball)|Dick Hall (1961).|group=note}} Benoit relieved Todd Van Poppel (who entered the game in the first inning after starter Aaron Myette was ejected for throwing at Melvin Mora) at the start of the third inning, and finished the game while allowing just one hit. The official scorer credited the win to Van Poppel and not Benoit, a decision that was also supported by Texas manager Jerry Narron. On August 22, 2007, Wes Littleton earned a save with the largest winning margin ever, pitching the last three innings of a 30–3 Texas Rangers win over the Baltimore Orioles. Littleton entered the game with a 14–3 lead, and the final 27-run differential broke the previous record for a save by eight runs. "The New York Times" noted that "there are the preposterous saves, of which Littleton's now stands out as No. 1." On October 29, 2014, in Game 7 of the 2014 World Series, Madison Bumgarner of the San Francisco Giants recorded the longest save in World Series history, pitching five scoreless innings of relief in a 3–2 victory over the Kansas City Royals. ==Usage== In baseball statistics, the term save is used to indicate the successful maintenance of a lead by a relief pitcher, usually the closer (baseball)|closer, until the end of the game. A save is a statistic credited to a relief pitcher, as set forth in Rule 9.19 of the Official Rules of Major League Baseball; the current definition has been in place since 1975. That rule states the official scorer shall credit a pitcher with a save when such pitcher meets all four of the following conditions: # He is the finishing pitcher in a game won by his team; # He is not the win (baseball)|winning pitcher; # He is credited with at least ⅓ of an inning pitched; and # He satisfies one of the following conditions: ## He enters the game with a lead of no more than three run (baseball)|runs and pitches for at least one inning ## He enters the game with the potential tying run either baserunning|on base, batting (baseball)|at bat or On deck (baseball)|on deck ## He pitches for at least three innings. The definition of a save has not always been the same. As initially defined in 1969, a relief pitcher could earn a save if he entered a game with his team in the lead and he held the lead through the end of the game, regardless of the score or for how long he pitched.[ ...
