 File:Causes-of-death-in-USA-vs.-media-coverage.png|thumb|upright=1.5|Causes of death in the US vs media coverage. The percentage of media attention for terrorism, homicide or suicide is much greater than the percentage of deaths caused by it.  In journalism and mass media, "sensationalism" is a type of editorial tactic. Events and topics in news stories are selected and worded to excite the greatest number of readers and viewers. This style of news reporting encourages Media bias|biased or emotionally loaded impressions of events rather than Journalistic objectivity|neutrality, and may cause a Media manipulation|manipulation to the truth of a story. Sensationalism may rely on reports about generally insignificant matters and portray them as a major influence on society, or biased presentations of News#Newsworthiness|newsworthy topics, in a trivial, or Tabloid journalism|tabloid manner, contrary to general assumptions of professional Journalism ethics and standards|journalistic standards. Some tactics include being deliberately obtuse, . Accessed June 2011. appeal to emotion|appealing to emotions, . Accessed June 2011. being controversy|controversial, intentionally omission bias|omitting facts and disinformation|information, . Accessed June 2011. being loud and egocentrism|self-centered, and acting to obtain attention. Trivial information and events are sometimes misrepresented and exaggerated as important or significant, and often include stories about the actions of individuals and small groups of people, the content (media)|content of which is often insignificant and irrelevant to the macro-level day-to-day events occurring globally. == History == In "A History of News", author Mitchell Stephens (academic)|Mitchell Stephens (professor of journalism and mass communication at New York University) notes sensationalism can be found in the Ancient Rome|Ancient Roman "Acta Diurna" (official notices and announcements which were presented daily on public message boards, the perceived content of which spread with enthusiasm in literacy|illiterate societies). Sensationalism was used in books of the 16th and 17th century, to teach morality|moral lessons. According to Stevens, sensationalism brought the news to a new audience when it became aimed at the working class|lower class, who had less of a need to accurately understand politics and the economy, to occupy them in other matters. Through sensationalism, he claims, the audience was further educated and encouraged to take more interest in the news. The more modern forms of sensationalism developed in the course of the nineteenth century in parallel with the expansion of print culture in industrialized nations. A genre of British literature, "sensation novels," became in the 1860s the best example of how the publishing industry could capitalize on a rhetoric made of surprising turns in the narrative to market serialized fiction in the expanded market of the periodical press. The London magazine "Belgravia", which was edited by the popular author of sensation novels Mary Elizabeth Braddon between 1867 and 1876, offered one of the earliest theories of modernity and its “shock value” mediated by sensationalism. The attention-grasping rhetorical techniques found in sensation fiction were also employed in articles on science, modern technology, finance, and in historical accounts of contemporary events, as discussed by Alberto Gabriele in "Reading Popular Culture in Victorian Print".Alberto Gabriele, Reading Popular Culture in Victorian Print: Belgravia and Sensationalism, New York and London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2009  The collection of essays "Sensationalism and the Genealogy of Modernity: a Global Nineteenth Century Perspective" edited by Alberto Gabriele is also helpful to track the transhistorical presence of sensationalism in several national contexts in the course of the long nineteenth century. Scholars in the collection engage in an interdisciplinary discussion on popular culture, literature, performance, art history, theory, pre-cinema, and early cinema.Alberto Gabriele, ed. Sensationalism and the Genealogy of Modernity: a Global Nineteenth Century Perspective. Palgrave Macmillan, 2016  == In mass media == File:Remember the Maine! And Don't Forget the Starving Cubans! - Victor Gillam (cropped).jpg|thumb|American cartoon published in 1898, "Remember the USS Maine (1889)|Maine! And Don't Forget the Starving Cubans!" Such sensationalist cartoons were used to support American intervention in the Cuban War of Independence. In the late 1800s, falling costs in paper production and rising revenues in advertising in the U.S. led to a drastic rise in newspaper's circulation, which attracted the growing audiences that advertisers desired. One presumed goal of sensational reporting is to increase or sustain Nielsen ratings|viewership or readership, from which media outlets can price their advertising higher to increase their Profit (accounting)|profits based on higher numbers of viewers and/or readers. . Accessed June 2011. . Accessed June 2011. Sometimes this can lead to a lesser focus on objective journalism in favor of a profit motive, in which editorial choices are based upon sensational stories and presentations to increase advertising revenue. Accessed September 2012 Additionally, advertisers tend to have a preference for their products or services to be reported positively in mass media, which can contribute to bias in news reporting in favor of media outlets protecting their profits and revenues, rather than reporting Journalistic objectivity|objectively about stated products and services. . Accessed June 2011. However, newspapers have a duty to report and investigate stories related to political corruption. Such investigative journalism is right and proper when it is backed up with documents, interviews with responsible witnesses, and other primary sources. Journalists and editors are often accused of sensationalizing scandals by those whose public image is harmed by the legitimate reporting of the scandal. News organizations are not obliged to (and are often Journalism ethics and standards|ethically obliged "not" to) avoid stories that might make local, state and national public figures uncomfortable. Occasionally, news organizations mistakenly relay false information from unreliable anonymous sources, who use mass media as a tool for Revenge|retaliation, defamation, victim and witness tampering, and monetary or personal gain. Therefore, any story based on sources who may be reasonably assumed to be motivated to act in this way is best interpreted with critical thinking. In extreme cases, mass media may report only information that makes a "anecdote|good story" without regard for factual accuracy or social relevance.  It has been argued that the distrust in government that arose in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal created a new business tactic for the media and resulted in the spread of negative, dishonest and misleading news coverage of American politics; such examples include the labeling of a large number of political scandals, regardless of their importance, with the List of scandals with "-gate" suffix|suffix "-gate". Accessed September 2012 Such stories are often perceived (rightly or wrongly) as partisan (political)|politically partisan or biased towards or against a group or individual because of the sensational nature in which they are reported. A media piece may report on a political figure in a biased way or present one side of an issue while deriding another. It may include sensational aspects such as zealots, :wikt:doomsayer|doomsayers and/or junk science. Complex subjects and affairs are often subject to sensationalism. Exciting and emotionally charged aspects can be drawn out without providing the elements needed (such as pertinent Source (journalism)|background, Investigative journalism|investigative, or Context (language use)|contextual information) for the audience to form its own opinions on the subject. == In broadcasting == Sensationalism is often blamed for the infotainment style of many news programs on radio and television. According to John Thompson (sociologist)|sociologist John Thompson, the debate of sensationalism used in the mass medium of broadcasting is based on a misunderstanding of its audience, especially the television audience. Thompson explains that the term 'mass' (which is connected to broadcasting) suggests a 'vast audience of many thousands, even millions of passive individuals'. Television news is restricted to showing the scenes of crimes rather than the crime itself because of the Predictability|unpredictability of events, whereas newspaper writers can always recall what they did not witness. Television news writers have room for fewer words than their newspaper counterparts. Their stories are measured in seconds, not column inches, and thus (even with footage) television stories are inherently shallower than most newspaper stories, using shorter words and familiar idioms to express ideas which a newspaper writer is more free to expand upon and define with precision. == Online == The Digital Revolution|digital revolution has completely changed the way people both create and react to news content. From a production standpoint, news outlets are now at a much higher risk of releasing content that is false because of how quickly news is circulated through the internet in order to capitalize on those views and clicks for profit. From a consumption standpoint, this means fewer people reading physical copies of newspapers and this is reflective in the way headlines are created for print media. The introduction of the term "clickbait" into the forefront of the global lexicon has had implications in many major world events, specifically the election of Donald J. Trump to the presidency of the United States, which reflects the growing weakness in "controlling the limits of what it is acceptable to say". Adventures in the Trump Twittersphere|language=en-US|work=The New York Times|url=https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/31/opinion/campaign-stops/adventures-in-the-trump-twittersphere.html|access-date=2021-04-01|issn=0362-4331}} Another reason for the concern over internet sensationalism is the way certain algorithms can create "news loops" that show people the exact same thing over and over again, known as "Echo chamber (media)|Echo chamber". Many characters on the internet have been able to profit off of these tactics by instilling fear through completely ridiculous and unverified sources which are able to self permeate online through these algorithms. While these algorithms are meant to prioritize more trustworthy sources, this doesn't always happen since they rely on keywords and phrases. As politics have become more polarized, these tactics have become increasingly prominent as news outlets realize how easy it is to push their own agendas on the internet in this fashion. It becomes easier to break the "Overton window", and the gatekeepers, journalists at major media organizations, are losing power. Many countries have implemented response efforts to this issue, as distrust in the media has become a global concern alongside the rapidly changing format of news media.{{Cite book|last1=Vasu|first1=Norman|last2=Ang|first2=Benjamin|last3=Teo|first3=Terri-Anne|last4=Jayakumar|first4=Shashi|last5=Faizal|first5=Muhammad|last6=Ahuja|first6=Ju ...
