 The "Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement" is a Protestantism|Protestant Christian denomination in the Seventh-day Sabbatarianism|Sabbatarian Adventism|Adventist movement that formed from a schism in the European Seventh-day Adventist Church during World War I over the position its European church leaders took on Sabbath in Seventh-day Adventism|Sabbath observance and on committing Adventists to the bearing of arms in military service for Imperial Germany in World War I.Holger Teubert, "The History of the So called "Reform Movement" of the Seventh-day Adventists," unpublished Manuscript, 9. The movement was formerly organised on an international level in 1925 at Gotha (town)|Gotha, Germany and adopted the name "Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement".  It was first registered as a SDARM General Conference|General Conference association in 1929 in Burgwedel, near Hanover, Germany. Following the General Conference association's dissolution by the Gestapo in 1936 it was re-registered in Sacramento, California, United States in 1949.  Its present world headquarters are in Roanoke, Virginia, USA.See on "The Name of Our Church", official SDARM Website, http://www.sdarm.org/origin/his_12_name.html  The Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement is governed by a SDARM General Conference|General Conference, a worldwide association of constituent territorial SDARM Units|Units consisting of Union Conferences, State/Field Conferences, Mission Fields and Missions not attached to any other unit. Through its local church congregations and groups of adherents, affiliated publishing houses, schools, health clinics and hospitals, the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement is active in over 132 countries of the world. The movement's beliefs largely reflect its distinctive Seventh-day Adventist Church heritage and Pillars of Adventism|foundational pillars, with some small divergences. See on "Beliefs" below. == History ==   The Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement came about as a result of the actions of L. R. Conradi and certain European church leaders during the war, who decided that it was acceptable for Adventists to take part in war, which was in clear opposition to the historical position of the church that had always upheld the Non-combatant|non-combative position. Since the American Civil War, Adventists were known as non-combatants, and had done work in hospitals or given medical care rather than combat roles.http://www.sidadventist.org/lead/index.php/resources/essent/89-leadership The Seventh-day Adventist leaders in Europe when the war began, determined on their own that it was permissible for Adventists to bear arms and serve in the military and other changes which went against traditional Adventist beliefs. The General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists sent Seventh-day Adventist Church|Seventh-day Adventist minister and General Conference Secretary William Ambrose Spicer to investigate the changes these leaders had instituted, but was unable to undo what L. R. Conradi and the others had done during the war.  After the war, the Seventh-day Adventist church sent a delegation of four brethren from the General Conference (A. G. Daniells|Arthur G. Daniells who was president of General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, L. H. Christian, F. M. Wilcox, Milton E. Kern|M. E. Kern) in July 1920, who came to a Ministerial Meeting in Friedensau with the hope of a reconciliation. Before the 200 Pastors and the Brethren from the General Conference present at this meeting, its European church leaders,  G. Dail, L. R. Conradi, H. F. Schuberth, and P. Drinhaus withdrew their statement about military service and apologized for what they had done. The Reformers were informed of this and the next day saw a meeting by the Adventist brethren with the Reform-Adventists. A. G. Daniells urged them to return to the Seventh-day Adventist church, but the Reform-Adventists maintained that the European church leaders had forsaken the truth during the war and the reconciliation failed.http://www.sidadventist.org/lead/index.php/resources/essent/89-leadership Soon after they began to form a separate group from the official Adventist church. A related group which also came about for the same reasons was the True and Free Seventh-day Adventists (TFSDA) which formed in the Soviet Union at this time, whose most well known leader was Vladimir Shelkov.  A major division then took place within the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement itself at its SDARM General Conference|General Conference session held at Zeist, Utrecht (province), Netherlands in 1951. The cause for the division involved tensions that had arisen over unresolved issues of the preceding years.  Charges of arbitrariness and authoritarianism by the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement leader and on the part of the General Conference administration towards member Units, failures by the General Conference committee to adequately resolve moral failings among leaders, issues concerning mal-administration of Church finances, and procedural and organisational irregularities prior to and during the Session itself are cited by the present organisation as significant contributing factors.Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference, "Our GC Delegation Sessions" 1948, http://www.sdarm.org/origin/his_11_sessions_III.html#1948  Accessed April 1, Zeist 2011.Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference, "Our GC Delegation Sessions" 1951,  Accessed April 1, 2011. After two weeks of deliberations within the Session trying to resolve some of these tensions, a move was made by a number of delegates to read a declaration enumerating the main problems involved and requesting that a committee to address the entire situation be established. The motion carried on the first vote but was overturned by the chairman. To signify their protest at what was held to be an arbitrary decision of the chair, 45% of delegates present, led by the then Secretary of the General Conference, left the Session room. The Session's proceedings faltered at this point. Efforts to reconcile the situation while all delegates were still present in Netherlands failed.Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference, "Our GC Delegation Sessions" 1951,  Accessed April 1, 2011."International Missionary Society Seventh-day Adventist Church Reform Movement - About IMS"  Accessed: April 1, 2011. Another factor affecting the administration of the Session at the time was the international situation behind the iron curtain.Ward R & Humphreys R, "Religious Bodies In Australia" 3rd Edition. New Melbourne Press, Victoria, Australia. p.171. 1995. Many of the units attached to the General Conference were unable to send delegates to the Zeist session due to restrictions on religious bodies in communist lands.Alfons Balbach, "History of the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement", Reformation Herald Publishing Association, Virginia, USA, 1999, pp97-98.  Proxy letters from a number of Union Conferences were held by the General Conference SecretaryWard R & Humphreys R, "Religious Bodies In Australia" 3rd Edition. New Melbourne Press, Victoria, Australia. p.171. 1995. enabling the session to convene legally (a provision enabled in the 1949 corporate registration), though the proxy holder still only had one vote regardless of the number of proxies held.  Those Units not represented directly accounted for approximately 60% of the organization's membership.  Consequently, neither of the two factions that became evident at the Zeist session were in a position to make any unilateral decisions.Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference, "Our GC Delegation Sessions" 1951,  Accessed April 1, 2011. Over the course of the next year, steps were taken by both parties to explain the situation to their respective member bodies (Union Conferences) that were affiliated up until this time to the one worldwide church administration.  Both factions re-organised themselves as General Conference committees independently of each other and proceeded to take the oversight of the SDARM General Conference affairs. = The Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement had been first registered as a general conference association in Burgwedel, near Hanover, Germany in 1929. Though never approved by the inaugural 1925 Gotha (town)|Gotha SDARM General Conference Session, the designation "International Missionary Society" was added to the beginning of the name. The full registered name at that time took the form "International Missionary Society, Seventh-day Adventist Reform Movement, General Conference". The reasons for adding the designation to the beginning of the name were purely pragmatic, and done in the interests of securing General Conference finances on loan to one of its member Units, namely the German Union Conference.  The SDARM General Conference operated under this German registration until 1936 when the association was dissolved by the Gestapo.Alfons Balbach, "History of the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement", Reformation Herald Publishing Association, Virginia, USA, 1999, pp.129-130. From 1936 until the conclusion of the World War II|second World War, there was no legally registered SDARM General Conference entity anywhere in the world, and would not be until 1949.  The international situation during those years prevented the convening of a General Conference Session.  It was not until 1948, when the first post-war General Conference session was held, that the delegates agreed to re-register the worldwide interests of the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement by incorporating the SDARM General Conference as an association in the USA. They also agreed to do this "under the name that was adopted by the General Conference delegation in session in 1925".  This decision was carried out in 1949.Balbach, p.130.  The registered name was now correctly, "Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference." It was under the By-Laws of this newly incorporated body that the 1951 Zeist General Conference Session was convened.Balbach, pp. 130-131 By 1951 the SDARM General Conference affairs and financial interests were formally associated with the USA registered entity. Consequently, in the aftermath of the Zeist session, legal proceedings to establish the recognized administrators of the registered General Conference corporate entity commenced.  These proceedings were finalised in May 1952 in an out-of-court agreement between the two factions.  Representatives of the faction that had engaged in the protest walk-out in 1951 were left in control of the registered SDARM General Conference association.Newspaper Article: Adventist Suit Over Control is Withdrawn, The Sacramento Union, May 8, 1952.Kramer, Helmut H., "The Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement (German Reform)", Biblical Research Institute, General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists. p.23. 1988. By 1955, when the next Session of Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference convened under the auspices the USA registered association, delegates present represented "9000 members (1000 less than in 1951)". This was a representation of 90% of the worldwide church membership recorded prior to the 1951 division.Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement General Conference, "Our GC Delegation Sessions" 1955, http://www.sdarm.org/origin/his_11_sessions_IV.html#1955  Accessed April 1, 2011. = Following the 1952 legal proceedings, in June of that year, representatives of the faction that had been the subject of the protest at Zeist conducted a second re-organisation. To distinguish themselves from their opposing faction, they adopted the name "International Missionary Society, Seventh-day Adventist Reform Movement, General Conference" with headquarters in Mosbach, Baden in Germany.Kramer ...
