  File:Steinrelief Pfarrkirche Altenkirchen.jpg|thumb|A priest of Svantevit depicted on a stone from Cape Arkona|Arkona, now in the church of Altenkirchen, Rügen. "Slavic mythology" or "Slavic religion" is the Religion|religious beliefs, myths, and ritual practices of the Slavs before Christianisation of the Slavs|Christianisation, which occurred at various stages between the 8th and the 13th century. The South Slavs, who likely settled in the Balkan Peninsula during the 6th–7th centuries AD, bordering with the Byzantine Empire to the south, came under the sphere of influence of Eastern Christianity, beginning with the creation of writing systems for Slavic languages (first Glagolitic, and then Cyrillic script) in 855 by the brothers Saints Cyril and Methodius and the adoption of Christianity in Bulgaria in 864 and 863 in Great Moravia. The East Slavs followed with the official adoption in 988 by Vladimir the Great of Kievan Rus'. The West Slavs|West Slavs' process of Christianisation was more gradual and complicated. The Moravians accepted Christianity as early as 831, the Bohemian dukes followed in 845, Slovaks accepted Christianity somewhere between the years 828 and 863, but the first historical Polish ruler (Mieszko I) accepted it much later, in 966, around the same time as the Sorbs, and the Polabian Slavs only came under the significant influence of the Catholic Church from the 12th century onwards. For the Polabian Slavs and the Sorbs, Christianisation went hand in hand with full or partial Germanisation. The Christianisation of the Slavic peoples was, however, a slow and—in many cases—superficial phenomenon, especially in what is today Russia. Christianisation was vigorous in western and central parts of what is today Ukraine, since they were closer to the capital, Kyiv. Even there, however, popular resistance led by Volkhv|"volkhv"s, pagan priests or shamans, recurred periodically for centuries. Popular resistance to Christianity was also widespread in early Poland, culminating in the Pagan reaction in Poland|pagan reaction. The West Slavs of the Baltic region|Baltic tenaciously withstood Christianity until it was violently imposed on them through the Northern Crusades. Among Polish people|Poles and East Slavs, rebellions broke out throughout the 11th century. Christian chroniclers reported that the Slavs regularly re-embraced their original religion ("relapsi sunt denuo ad paganismus"). p. 367. Many elements of the Slavic indigenous religion were officially incorporated into Slavic Christianity (which manifested itself in the architecture of the Russian Church, icon painting, etc.), and, besides this, the worship of Slavic gods has persisted in unofficial folk religion until modern times. The Slavs' resistance to Christianity gave rise to a "whimsical syncretism" which in Old Church Slavonic vocabulary was defined as "dvoeverie", "double faith". Since the early 20th century, Slavic folk religion has undergone an organised reinvention and reincorporation in the movement of Slavic Native Faith (Rodnovery). ==Sources==  One of the first written sources on the religion of the ancient Slavs is the description of the Byzantine historian Procopius of Caesarea (6th century), who mentioned sacrifices to the supreme god-the thunderer of the Slavs, river spirits ("nymphs") and others:  Al-Masudi, an Arab historian, geographer and traveler, equates the paganism of the Slavs and Names of Rus', Russia and Ruthenia|rus' with reason:  Western European authors of the 11th and 12th centuries gave detailed descriptions of the sanctuaries and cults of Redigost (Radegast (god)|Radegast, Svarozhich) in Rethra, Svetovid|Svyatovit (Svetovid) in Arkon (Jaromarsburg), Triglav in Szczecin, Chernobog, the sanctuary in Volyně, etc. The identification of a number of Eastern European monuments with Slavic sanctuaries is a matter of dispute (Peryn, a complex near the site of the Zbruch idol). / Ilya Gavritukhin, Vladimir Petrukhin. // Saint-Germain World 1679-Social security . - 2015. - pp. 388-389 — - (Great Russian Encyclopedia :  / ch. ed. Yuri Osipov; 2004-2017, vol. 30) — - ISBN 978-5-85270-367-5.  The main idea of paganism and mythology of the Slavs is given primarily by historical and documentary sources (Letopis (genre)|letopises and chronicles). The Tale of Bygone Years under the year 980 contains a story about the sanctuary in Kiev, built by Vladimir Svyatoslavich, and the idols of pagan gods installed there are mentioned:  И нача къняжити Володимиръ въ Кыевѣ единъ, и постави кумиры на хълму, вънѣ двора теремьнаго: Перуна древяна, а главу его сьребряну, а усъ златъ, и Хърса, Дажьбога и Стрибога и Сѣмарьгла и Мокошь. И жьряху имъ, наричюще я богы, и привожаху сыны своя и дъщери, и жьряху бѣсомъ. И осквьрняху землю требами своими; и осквьрни ся кръвьми земля Русьская и хълмъ тъ. Нъ преблагыи Богъ не хотя съмьрти грѣшьникомъ, на томь хълмѣ нынѣ цьркы есть святаго Василия, якоже послѣди съкажемъ.}} The text mentions the deities Svarog, Yarilo and Veles (god)|Veles. It is known that the idol of Veles stood in Kiev "under the mountain", probably on the Podil|Kiev Podol, in the lower part of the city, that is, in the trade and craft part of Kiev at the pier on the Pochain River. In the "Life of Vladimir the Great|Vladimir" it is said that this idol was overthrown during the baptism of Kievan Rus in 988: "And Veles idol ... ordered to throw off the river in Pochaina".Yuri Krivosheev. The religion of the Eastern Slavs on the eve of the baptism of Russia. Leningrad: Znanie, 1988. - 32 p. Ancient Russian teachings against paganism can also serve as sources. In this genre, three of the most famous monuments are known: "The Word of St. Gregory about idols", "The word of a certain Christ-lover and the punishment of the spiritual father (about submission and obedience)" and "The Walking of the Virgin in torment".  In the absence of original mythological texts, it is possible to judge the paganism of the Slavs as a historical stage of the general Slavic culture only by secondary data-archaeological and book-written sources, by comparing them and reconstructing what historians Evgeny Anichkov, Dmitry Konstantinovich Zelenin|Dmitry Zelenin, Lubor Niederle, Henryk Łowmiański, Aleksander Gieysztor, Stanisław Urbańczyk and many others did. It was only at the beginning of the 20th century that reconstruction became widespread by comparing Slavic data with data from other Indo-European (Baltic, Iranian, German, etc.) cultural traditions (first of all, the works of Vyacheslav Ivanov (philologist)|Vechaslav Ivanov and Vladimir Toporov are distinguished). The richest sources for the study of Slavic paganism as a cultural model and the reconstruction of Ancient Slavic ideas remain modern (dating back to the 19th—20th centuries) linguistic, ethnographic and folklore evidence of Slavic traditions.Slavic antiquities: An ethnolinguistic dictionary: in 5 volumes / under the general ed. Nikita Tolstoy // Paganism (the author of the article is Svetlana Mikhailovna Tolstaya). Moscow, 2012. Vol. 5: С (Сказка) - Я (Ящерица). - pp. 616-619 — - ISBN 978-5-7133-1380-7. Many traces of slavic paganism are left in Western European toponymy, including the names of settlements, rivers, mountains, and villages. ==Overview and common features== File:Slavnost svatovitova na rujane.jpg|thumb|"The Celebration of Svantovit in Rügen|Rujana: When Gods Are at War, Art is the Salvation" ("Slavnost Svantovítova: Když jsou bohové ve válce, pak je umění spásou")—Alphonse Mucha, 1912. Pagan-themed painting part of "The Slav Epic".. p. 107.}} Twentieth-century scholars who pursued the study of ancient Slavic religion include Vyacheslav Ivanov (philologist)|Vyacheslav Ivanov, Vladimir Toporov, Marija Gimbutas, Boris Rybakov, and Roman Jakobson, among others. Rybakov is noted for his effort to re-examine medieval ecclesiastical texts, synthesizing his findings with archaeological data, comparative mythology, ethnography, and nineteenth-century folk practices. He also elaborated one of the most coherent pictures of ancient Slavic religion in his "Paganism of the Ancient Slavs" and other works. Among earlier, nineteenth-century scholars there was Bernhard Severin Ingemann, known for his study of "Fundamentals of a North Slavic and Wendish mythology". Historical documents about Slavic religion include the "Primary Chronicle", compiled in Kiev around 1111, and the "Novgorod First Chronicle" compiled in the Novgorod Republic. They contain detailed reports of the annihilation of the official Slavic religion of Kiev and Novgorod, and the subsequent "double faith". The "Primary Chronicle" also contains the authentic text of Rus-Greek treatises (dated 945 and 971) with native pre-Christian oaths. From the eleventh century onwards, various Rus writings were produced against the survival of Slavic religion, and Slavic gods were interpolated in the translations of foreign literary works, such as the "Malalas Chronicle" and the "Alexandreis". The West Slavs who dwelt in the area between the Vistula and the Elbe stubbornly resisted the Northern Crusades, and the history of their resistance is written down in the "Latin Chronicles" of three German clergymen—Thietmar of Merseburg and Adam of Bremen in the eleventh century, and Helmold in the twelfth—, in the twelfth-century biographies of Otto of Bamberg, and in Saxo Grammaticus' thirteenth-century "Gesta Danorum". These documents, together with minor German documents and the Icelandic "Knýtlinga saga", provide an accurate description of northwestern Slavic religion. The religions of other Slavic populations are less documented, because writings about the theme were produced late in time after Christianisation, such as the fifteenth-century "Chronica Polonorum (1519)|Polish Chronicle", and contain a lot of sheer inventions. In the times preceding Christianisation, some Greek and Roman chroniclers, such as Procopius and Jordanes in the sixth century, sparsely documented some Slavic concepts and practices. Slavic paganism survived, in more or less pure forms, among the Slovenes along the Soča river up to the 1330s.   The linguistic unity, and negligible dialectal differentiation, of the Slavs until the end of the first millennium AD, and the lexical uniformity of religious vocabulary, witness a uniformity of early Slavic religion. It has been argued that the essence of early Slavdom was ethnoreligious before being ethnonational; that is to say, belonging to the Slavs was chiefly determined by conforming to certain beliefs and practices rather than by having a certain racial ancestry or being born in a  ...
