     | programmer = Matsuhide Mizoguchi | artist = Hiroyuki Kawaguchi Kazuyuki Hoshino | composer = "Japanese/European release:" | series = "Sonic the Hedgehog" | released = | "Sega CD" "Windows" "Android, PS3, Xbox 360" "iOS" "Apple TV"}} | genre = Platform game|Platform | modes = Single-player | platforms = Sega CD, Windows,  GameCube, PlayStation 2, Android (operating system)|Android, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, iOS, Apple TV }} |Sonikku za Hejjihoggu Shī Dī|lead=yes|group=lower-alpha}} is a 1993 platform game developed by Sega for the Sega CD. As Sonic the Hedgehog (character)|Sonic the Hedgehog, the player attempts to protect an extraterrestrial body, Little Planet, from Doctor Robotnik. Like other "Sonic the Hedgehog|Sonic" games, Sonic runs through themed Level (video gaming)|levels while collecting Rings (Sonic the Hedgehog)|rings and defeating robots. "Sonic CD" introduces time travel as a game mechanic. By traveling through time, players can access different versions of stages, featuring alternative layouts, music, and graphics. "Sonic CD" began as a Porting|port of the Sega Genesis game "Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)|Sonic the Hedgehog" (1991) to the Sega CD, but developed into a separate project. Led by "Sonic" co-creator Naoto Ohshima, the developers sought to show off the technical capabilities of the Sega CD. "Sonic CD" features the debuts of the recurring "Sonic" characters Amy Rose and Metal Sonic, and includes animated cutscenes. Two soundtracks were composed: the one featured in the Japanese and European versions was composed by Naofumi Hataya and Masafumi Ogata, while the one in the North American version was composed by Spencer Nilsen, David Young (composer)|David Young, and Mark Crew. "Sonic CD" was released in late 1993. It received critical acclaim and is often called one of the best "Sonic" and platform games. Reviewers praised its size, music, and time travel feature, although some felt it did not fully use the Sega CD's capabilities. It sold over 1.5 million copies, making it the bestselling Sega CD game. "Sonic CD" was ported to Windows as part of the Sega PC brand in 1996, and to the PlayStation 2 and GameCube as part of "Sonic Gems Collection" in 2005. A video game remake|remake, developed by Christian Whitehead using the Retro Engine, was released for various platforms in 2011 and rereleased as part of the "Sonic Origins" compilation in 2022. == Gameplay == File:SonicCDTimeTravel.png|thumb|left|alt=An image depicting Sonic in the four time periods in Sonic CD's Palmtree Panic level. Clockwise from left: past, present, good future, and bad future.|("Clockwise from top left") The past, present, good future, and bad future variants of the game's first level, Palmtree Panic "Sonic CD" is a side-scrolling platform game similar to the original "Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)|Sonic the Hedgehog". Players control Sonic the Hedgehog (character)|Sonic the Hedgehog as he ventures to stop his nemesis Doctor Robotnik from obtaining the magical Time Stones and conquering a Little Planet. Like previous games, Sonic can destroy enemies and objects (such as certain walls and television monitors containing power-ups) by rolling into a ball, and collects Rings (Sonic the Hedgehog)|rings as a form of health. Sonic can also perform a "spin dash" and a "super peel-out", both of which increase his speed. The game has seven Level (video gaming)|levels. In the first and Sonic the Hedgehog 2|second games, the levels were named zones, but in this game, they're named rounds, the previously-named acts now named zones instead. Each round is split into three zones, the third of which ends in a boss fight against Robotnik. Players start with three Life (gaming)|lives, which are lost when they suffer any type of damage without rings in their possession; losing all lives results in a game over. "Sonic CD" is differentiated from other "Sonic" games through its time travel game mechanic, which allows players to access different versions of rounds set in the past, present and future. The music changes within the different time zones, as remixes of the present music. Sonic starts the first two zones in the present. The third zone is always set in the future, its timeline dependent upon whether the player destroyed both transporters. He travels through time by hitting signs labelled "past" or "future", maintaining his speed afterward. By default, future stages are neglected and littered with machinery after Robotnik has conquered the Little Planet, appropriately named "bad futures." Players are encouraged to convert each zone into a "good future", with bright colors, thriving nature, and few enemies. To achieve a good future in each zone, players must travel to the past and destroy a hidden transporter where enemy robots spawn. Achieving a good future in every zone unlocks the game's best ending. By finishing a level with more than 50 rings, Sonic can access a special stage, in which he must destroy six UFOs in a pseudo-3D environment within a time limit. Time is reduced swiftly if the player runs through water, though a special UFO which appears when time is running out grants extra time if destroyed. If the player destroys all the UFOs before the time runs out, they earn a Time Stone. Collecting all seven Time Stones automatically creates a good future in every zone, unlocking the best ending. The game also features a time attack mode, where players can replay completed levels for the fastest time possible; a "D.A. Garden", where players can listen to the music of completed zones; and a "Visual Mode", where players can view the opening and closing animations. The game also includes a save feature, which uses the back-up memory of the Sega CD. ==Plot== Some time after his first adventure, "Sonic CD" opens with Sonic rushing to Never Lake, where an extraterrestrial body, Little Planet, appears in the last month of every year. His nemesis, Dr. Robotnik, has chained the planet to a mountain and begun transforming it into a giant fortress with his robot army. To execute his plan, Robotnik uses the Time Stones, seven diamonds which controls the flow of time, hidden in the different zones. Sonic ventures into the planet, followed by the besotted Amy Rose, his self-proclaimed girlfriend. Robotnik dispatches his newest invention, Metal Sonic, to kidnap Amy at Collision Chaos, luring Sonic into danger. After outrunning Metal Sonic in Stardust Speedway and saving Amy, Sonic fights and defeats Robotnik in his lair, Metallic Madness. Two endings exist, depending on whether or not the player collected the Time Stones or achieved a good future in each level. In the good ending, Little Planet thanks Sonic with a shower of stars and leaves Never Lake; in the bad ending, Little Planet still leaves, but Robotnik uses the Time Stones to bring it back and the player is urged to replay the game to achieve the good ending. ==Development==  File:Naoto ohshima gdc 2018.jpg|thumb|right|alt=An image of a middle-aged Japanese man wearing glasses, a white button-up shirt, and a black coat.|"Sonic CD" director Naoto Ohshima at the 2018 Game Developers Conference The original "Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)|Sonic the Hedgehog" (1991) was developed by Sonic Team at Sega. It was a major commercial success and positioned Sega as Nintendo's main rival in the console market. The lead programmer, Yuji Naka, dissatisfied with Sega of Japan's rigid corporate policies, moved with several members of Sonic Team to the United States to develop "Sonic the Hedgehog 2" with Sega Technical Institute (STI). Meanwhile, Sega planned to release the Sega CD add-on for its Sega Genesis|Genesis, and wanted a "Sonic" game that would demonstrate its more advanced features. Naoto Ohshima, the designer of Sonic, was "Sonic CD"s director; the remainder of the team comprised Sega staff who had developed "The Revenge of Shinobi (1989 video game)|The Revenge of Shinobi", "Golden Axe 2", and "Streets of Rage (video game)|Streets of Rage". The team built "Sonic CD" using the original "Sonic the Hedgehog" code as a base. "Sonic CD" was conceived as an enhanced porting|port of "Sonic the Hedgehog" for the Sega CD, but it gradually developed into a separate project. It was titled "CD Sonic the Hedgehog" first before being renamed "Sonic CD". Ohshima does not consider "Sonic CD" a sequel to "Sonic the Hedgehog" or "Sonic 2", although the artist Yasushi Yamaguchi said its story may be set between the two.  "Sonic the Hedgehog" had a balance on speed and platforming; STI built on the speed with "Sonic 2"s more focused level designs. However, Ohshima's team sought to focus on the platforming and exploration aspects. Ohshima said, "our ideas were to make the world and setting larger, and to add more replayability, so it would be something you could enjoy playing for a long time". According to artist Kazuyuki Hoshino, because it was a Sega CD game, the team wanted "Sonic CD" to stand out compared to previous "Sonic" games. Visually, the game was designed to resemble computer-generated imagery|CG imagery; the Sonic Sprite (computer graphics)|sprite on the title screen was based on a Sonic figurine by Taku Makino that the team photographed and scanned. "Sonic CD" marks the debuts of Amy Rose and Metal Sonic, both designed by Hoshino. Although Hoshino created Amy's in-game graphics, many staff members contributed ideas to her design. Her headband and trainer shoes reflected Ohshima's tastes while her mannerisms reflected the traits Hoshino looked for in women at the time. Hoshino designed Metal Sonic in response to Ohshima wanting a strong rival for Sonic. Hoshino had a clear image of Metal Sonic in his mind from the moment he was briefed, and his design emerged after only a few sketches. The character graphics were created using Sega's proprietary graphics system for the Genesis, the "Sega Digitizer MK-III", featuring a bitmap and animation editor. The team mostly used Macintosh IIcis. Graphics data was stored on 3.5-inch floppy disks, which were handed to the programmer to work into the game. Though Naka was not directly involved with "Sonic CD", he exchanged design ideas with Ohshima. Ohshima cited the film "Back to the Future" (1985) as an influence on the time travel. The developers designed four variants of each stage (one for each time period). Ohshima hoped for the time period to change instantly with a "sonic boom" effect, but the progra ...
