   File:Manchukuo Railmap en.png|thumb|Rail network of Manchukuo in 1945 File:South Manchuria RW 1920.jpg|thumb|Share of the South Manchuria Railway Co. Ltd., issued 1920 File:South Manchuria Railway (Mantetsu) May 1920 Schedule.jpg|thumb|Schedule Page of South Manchuria Railway (Mantetsu) Train Service in May 1920 File:South Manchuria Railway LOC 03283.jpg|thumb|A train of the South Manchuria Railway The "South Manchuria Railway" (; ), officially <!--do NOT include pinyin as 株式會社 is strictly Japanese terminology-->, "Mantetsu" () or "Mantie" () for short, was a large  of the Empire of Japan whose primary function was the operation of railways on the Dalian–Shenyang|Fengtian (Mukden)–Changchun (called Changchun|Xinjing from 1931 to 1945) corridor in northeastern China, as well as on several branch lines. In 1905, after Russia's defeat in the Russo-Japanese War, this area was taken over by Japan as the South Manchuria Railway Zone. Mantetsu was established in 1906 to operate the railways taken over from the Russians. Subsequently, Mantetsu expanded by building new lines for itself and for Chinese-owned undertakings, and after the establishment of the puppet state of Manchukuo in 1932, it was also entrusted with the management of the Manchukuo National Railway. Between 1917 and 1925, Mantetsu was also responsible for the management of the Chosen Government Railway in Korea under Japanese rule|Japanese-occupied Korea. However, it was also involved in nearly every aspect of the economic, cultural and political life of Manchuria,Kinney, Henry W., "Manchuria Today", Dairen, December 1930 from power generation to agricultural research, for which reason it was often referred to as "Japan's East India Company in China". Nisshō Inoue, the founder of the interwar Japanese far-right militant organization Ketsumeidan (血盟団, League of Blood), was employed by "Mantetsu" from 1909 to 1920. In 1945, the Soviet Union Soviet invasion of Manchuria|invaded and overran Manchukuo, and following Japan's defeat in the Pacific War, Mantetsu itself was dissolved by order of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers|American occupation authorities in occupied Japan. The railway was operated by the Soviets for a time, and handed over to China Railway after the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949. Fengtian has been called Shenyang since 1945, and the line from there to Dalian is today part of the Shenyang–Dalian railway|Shenda Railway from Changchun to Dalian, whilst the Shenyang–Changchun section is now part of the Beijing–Harbin railway|Jingha Railway; the branch lines have also been part of China Railway since then. ==History== File:South Manchuria Pashina 973.jpg|thumb|Locomotive for "Asia Express" File:Manchukuo Hsinking station.jpg|thumb|200px|Xinjing (Changchun) Railway Station File:Dining-Car of SMR.JPG|thumb|Dining car of South Manchuria Railway File:Japanese Government Railways Wartime Route Map.jpg|thumb|300px|Japanese Government Railways map of Hokkaido, Chosen, Karahuto, and Manchuko The main line from Changchun to Port Arthur, as Luishun was called under Russian rule, was built between 1898 and 1903 by the Russians as the southern branch of their Chinese Eastern Railway according to the Li–Lobanov Treaty|1896 secret treaty and the Convention for the Lease of the Liaotung Peninsula|1898 lease convention between Qing China and Imperial Russia in the aftermath of the First Sino-Japanese War.   Following the Japanese victory over Imperial Russia in 1905 after the Russo-Japanese War and the signing of the Treaty of Portsmouth, most of the southern branch (Harbin—Port Arthur naval base|Port Arthur) of the China Eastern Railway was transferred to Japanese control.  The last station remaining in Russian hands was at Kuancheng District|Kuanchengzi () in modern-day Changchun.  The northernmost Japanese-controlled station was the Changchun railway station."Provisional Convention ... concerning the junction of the Japanese and Russian Railways in Manchuria" – June 13, 1907.  Under the authorization of Emperor Meiji, Japan then established a new semi-privately held company, the South Manchurian Railway Company (a.k.a. "Mantetsu"), with a market capitalization|capitalization of 200 million yen to operate the railroad and to develop settlements and industries along its route.Young, Japan's Total Empire, pp 25  The organizing committee was headed by General Kodama Gentarō, and after his death, by General Terauchi Masatake.  Count Gotō Shimpei, formerly the Japanese governor of Taiwan, was appointed the first president of the company, and the headquarters was established in Tokyo before relocated to Dalian in 1907.Coox, Nomonhan pp.6 One of the first tasks of the new company was to change the railway gauge.  The rail line was originally built according to the gauge of , during the war it had been Gauge conversion|converted by the advancing Japanese troops to the Japanese  gauge, in order to facilitate the use of rolling stock brought from Japan. But once the new Japanese South Manchuria Railway Company took possession of the line, it had the tracks re-gauged again, now to the gauge of , Luis Jackson, Industrial Commissioner of the Erie Railroad. "Rambles in Japan and China". In , vol. 26 (March 1913), pp. 91-92 presumably with an eye to connecting the system to other railways of China. In 1907, an agreement was reached between the Japanese and Russian authorities about connecting the Japanese South Manchuria Railway with the line to the north, which remained in the hands of Russian China Far East Railway. According to the agreement, Russian gauge tracks would continue from the "Russian" Kuanchengzi Station to the "Japanese" Changchun railway station|Changchun station, and vice versa, tracks on the "gauge adapted by the South Manchuria Railway" (i.e., the standard gauge) would continue from the Changchun Station to the Kuancheng Station. By the end of 1907, the company employed 9,000 Japanese and 4,000 Chinese. By 1910, those numbers had increased to 35,000 and 25,000 respectively. The railway used a significant amount of U.S.-made rails and signaling equipment, as well as some steam locomotives built by the American Locomotive Company at Dunkirk, NY. A visiting executive from the Erie Railroad was quite impressed with the arrangement, and described South Manchurian Railway ca. 1913 as "the only railroad in the whole world that is like our American railroads (and they are, fairly speaking, the best)". File:South Manchuria Railway Promotional.jpg|thumb|left|250px|Promotional postcard from the 1920s "Mantetsu" quickly expanded the system inherited from Russia to staggering proportions, building coal mines at Fushun and Yantai, and harbor facilities at Andong, Yingkou, and Dalian. At each station, "Mantetsu" built hotels for travelers and warehouses for goods. Japanese settlers were encouraged through the construction of schools, libraries, hospitals and public utilities. The "Mantetsu" Research Wing was the centerpiece of Japan's colonial program, and instigated agricultural research into development of soybean farming. Land under cultivation expanded 70% in 20 years.Coox, Nomonhan pp.21 From 1916, "Mantestu" began to spin off a number of subsidiary companies, including Showa Steel Works, Dalian Ceramics, Dalian Oil & Fat, South Manchurian Glass, as well as flour mills, sugar mills, electrical power plants, shale oil plants and chemical plants.Young, Japan's Total Empire, pp32 On 31 July 1917, the management of the Chosen Government Railway ("Sentetsu") in Korea under Japanese rule|Japanese-occupied Korea was transferred from the Railway Bureau of the Governor-General of Korea|Government-General of Korea to Mantetsu, which established the Mantetsu Keijō/Gyeongseong Railway Administration (, ; , "Mancheol Gyeongseong Gwalliguk"), and under Mantetsu control Korea's railway network was expanded rapidly. On 1 April 1925, management of Sentetsu was returned to the Railway Bureau, though Mantetsu retained control of the line along the Korea–Manchuria border from the port of Rajin-guyok|Najin in Korea to Tumen, Jilin|Tumen in Manchuria and to Sambong Station|Sangsambong in Korea. Mantetsu called this line the North Chosen Line, and it remained under Mantetsu control until 1945. Company assets rose from 163 million yen in 1908 to over a billion yen in 1930. "Mantetsu" was by far the largest corporation in Japan, and also its most profitable, averaging rates of return from 25 to 45 percent per year. During the 1920s, Mantetsu provided for over a quarter of the Japanese government's tax revenues.Young, Japan's Total Empire, pp 31-32 Over 75% of "Mantetsu's" income was generated by its freight business, with the key to profitability coming from soybean exports, both to Japan proper and to Europe. Soybean production increased exponentially with increasing demand for soy oil, and for soy meal for use in fertilizer and compound feed|animal feed. By 1927, half of the world's supply of soybean was from Manchuria and the efforts by "Mantetsu" to expand production and to ship to export ports was a classic example of an extractive colonial economy dependent on a single product. In 1931, the Mukden Incident occurred, where the Japanese military faked an attack on the railway by Chinese partisans as a pretext for the Japanese invasion of Manchuria."The Cambridge History of Japan: The Twentieth Century", p. 294, Peter Duus, John Whitney Hall, Cambridge University Press: 1989 "An instinct for War: Scenes from the battlefields of history", p. 315, Roger J. Spiller, ; Harvard University Press"Concise dictionary of modern Japanese history", p. 120, Janet Hunter, University of California Press: 1984,  File:Ad of South Manchuria Railway 19370815.jpg|thumb|upright|Advertisement in 1937 "Mantetsu" was also charged with a government-like role in managing the rail transportation system after the formation of Manchukuo in 1932, including management of the (theoretically independent) Manchukuo National Railway. By 1938, Mantetsu had 72 subsidiary companies, development projects in 25 urban areas and carried 17,515,000 passengers per year.Coox, Nomonhan, pp 1078 Between 1930 and 1940, the Japanese population of Manchukuo rose by 800,000 making ethnic Japanese the majority in many of the towns and cities served by "Mantetsu". "Mantetsu" prided itself on state-of-the-art urban planning, with modern sanitary sewer|sewer systems, public parks, and creative modern architecture far in advance of what could be found in Japan itself. These things were possible due to "Mantetsu's" tremendous profitability, and its political power to seize property and silence opposition and dissent at will through its political connections to the military and totalitarianism|totalitarian national leadership.Young, Japan's Total Empire, pp.250 In 1934, "Mantetsu" inaugurated the "Asia Express", a high speed train from Dalian to the Manchukuo capital of Changchun|Xinjing (Changchun). Reaching a top speed of , the "Asia Express" was the fastest scheduled train in Asia at the time. Changchun remained the break of gauge point between the Russian and standard gauges in the 1930s,, The New Zealand Railways Magazine, Volume 6, Issue 8 (April 1, 1932.) until the Chinese Eastern railway itself was bought by Manchukuo and converted to the standard gauge in the mid-1930s. In 1936, the company owned 466 locomotives, 554 coaches and 8134 goods wagons. In 1945, the Soviet Union Soviet invasion of Manchuria|invaded and overran Manchukuo.  Rolling stock and movable equipment was looted and taken back to the Soviet Union; some was returned when the Chinese Communist government came into power.  "Mantetsu" itself was dissolved by order of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers|American occupation authorities in occupied Japan.  The People's Republic of China government later merged the northern half of the South Manchuria Railway's mainline (the Renkyō Line) with other railway lines to form the pr ...
