 Image:Spektrumanalysator FSL von Rohde & Schwarz.jpg|right|thumb|A spectrum analyzer from 2005 File:A modern real time spectrum analyzer.jpg|thumb|A modern real time spectrum analyzer from 2019 A "spectrum analyzer" measures the magnitude of an input signal versus frequency within the full frequency range of the instrument. The primary use is to measure the power of the spectrum of known and unknown signals. The input signal that most common spectrum analyzers measure is electrical; however, Frequency spectrum|spectral compositions of other signals, such as acoustic pressure waves and optical light waves, can be considered through the use of an appropriate transducer. Spectrum analyzers for other types of signals also exist, such as optical spectrum analyzers which use direct optical techniques such as a monochromator to make measurements. By analyzing the Frequency spectrum|spectra of electrical signals, dominant frequency, electric power|power, distortion, harmonics, Bandwidth (signal processing)|bandwidth, and other spectral components of a signal can be observed that are not easily detectable in time domain waveforms.  These parameters are useful in the characterization of electronic devices, such as wireless transmitters. The display of a spectrum analyzer has "frequency" displayed on the horizontal axis and the "amplitude" on the vertical axis. To the casual observer, a spectrum analyzer looks like an oscilloscope, which plots "amplitude" on the vertical axis but "time" on the horizontal axis. In fact, some lab instruments can function either as an oscilloscope or a spectrum analyzer. == History ==  Image:sonagraphe.jpg|thumb|right|A spectrum analyzer circa 1970 The first spectrum analyzers, in the 1960s, were swept-tuned instruments." "; Bob Hiebert, 2005, accessed 10 April 2013. Following the discovery of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) in 1965, the first FFT-based analyzers were introduced in 1967." "; Joe Deery, 2007, accessed 10 April 2013. Today, there are three basic types of analyzer: the swept-tuned spectrum analyzer, the vector signal analyzer, and the real-time spectrum analyzer. == Types == Image:Spectrum Analyser PCB.jpg|thumb|right|The main PCB from a  spectrum analyser. Showing the Distributed element filter|stripline PCB filters, and modular block construction. Spectrum analyzer types are distinguished by the methods used to obtain the spectrum of a signal. There are swept-tuned and fast Fourier transform (FFT) based spectrum analyzers: *A "swept-tuned" analyzer uses a superheterodyne receiver to Superheterodyne receiver#High-side and low-side injection|down-convert a portion of the input signal spectrum to the center frequency of a narrow band-pass filter, whose instantaneous output power is recorded or displayed as a function of time.  By sweeping the receiver's center-frequency (using a voltage-controlled oscillator) through a range of frequencies, the output is also a function of frequency.  But while the sweep centers on any particular frequency, it may be missing short-duration events at other frequencies. *An FFT analyzer computes a time-sequence of periodograms.  "FFT" refers to a particular mathematical algorithm used in the process.  This is commonly used in conjunction with a superheterodyne receiver|receiver and analog-to-digital converter.  As above, the receiver reduces the center-frequency of a portion of the input signal spectrum, but the portion is not swept.  The purpose of the receiver is to reduce the sampling rate that the analyzer must contend with.  With a sufficiently low sample-rate, FFT analyzers can process all the samples (100% duty-cycle), and are therefore able to avoid missing short-duration events. == Form factor == Spectrum analyzers tend to fall into four form factors: benchtop, portable, handheld and networked.  This form factor is useful for applications where the spectrum analyzer can be plugged into AC power, which generally means in a lab environment or production/manufacturing area. Bench top spectrum analyzers have historically offered better performance and specifications than the portable or handheld form factor. Bench top spectrum analyzers normally have multiple fans (with associated vents) to dissipate heat produced by the Central processing unit|processor. Due to their architecture, bench top spectrum analyzers typically weigh more than . Some bench top spectrum analyzers offer optional battery packs, allowing them to be used away from AC power. This type of analyzer is often referred to as a "portable" spectrum analyzer.  This form factor is useful for any applications where the spectrum analyzer needs to be taken outside to make measurements or simply carried while in use. Attributes that contribute to a useful portable spectrum analyzer include: *Optional battery-powered operation to allow the user to move freely outside. *Clearly viewable display to allow the screen to be read in bright sunlight, darkness or dusty conditions. *Light weight (usually less than ).  File:Space Aggressors test Red Flag Airmen (2743147).jpeg|thumb|Handheld spectrum analyzer. This form factor is useful for any application where the spectrum analyzer needs to be very light and small. Handheld analyzers usually offer a limited capability relative to larger systems. Attributes that contribute to a useful handheld spectrum analyzer include: *Very low power consumption. *Battery-powered operation while in the field to allow the user to move freely outside. *Very small size *Light weight (usually less than ).  This form factor does not include a display and these devices are designed to enable a new class of geographically-distributed spectrum monitoring and analysis applications. The key attribute is the ability to connect the analyzer to a network and monitor such devices across a network.  While many spectrum analyzers have an Ethernet port for control, they typically lack efficient data transfer mechanisms and are too bulky or expensive to be deployed in such a distributed manner.   Key applications for such devices include RF intrusion detection systems for secure facilities where wireless signaling is prohibited.  As well cellular operators are using such analyzers to remotely monitor interference in licensed spectral bands.  The distributed nature of such devices enable geo-location of transmitters, spectrum monitoring for dynamic spectrum access and many other such applications. Key attributes of such devices include: * Network-efficient data transfer * Low power consumption * The ability to synchronize data captures across a network of analyzers * Low cost to enable mass deployment. == Theory of operation == Image:BPFAnimationV2.gif|right|This animation shows how the resolution bandwidth of a swept-tuned spectrum analyzer is affected by the IF bandpass filter. Notice that wider bandwidth filters are unable to resolve the two closely space frequencies and the LO feedthrough causes the appearance of a baseband signal.  As discussed above in "types", a swept-tuned spectrum analyzer Superheterodyne receiver#High-side and low-side injection|down-converts a portion of the input signal spectrum to the center frequency of a band-pass filter by sweeping the voltage-controlled oscillator through a range of frequencies, enabling the consideration of the full frequency range of the instrument. The bandwidth of the band-pass filter dictates the resolution bandwidth, which is related to the minimum bandwidth detectable by the instrument.  As demonstrated by the animation to the right, the smaller the bandwidth, the more spectral resolution. However, there is a trade-off between how quickly the display can update the full frequency span under consideration and the frequency resolution, which is relevant for distinguishing frequency components that are close together.  For a swept-tuned architecture, this relation for sweep time is useful: : <math>\ ST=\frac{k(\mathrm{Span})}{RBW^2}</math> Where ST is sweep time in seconds, k is proportionality constant, Span is the frequency range under consideration in hertz, and RBW is the resolution bandwidth in Hertz." ", p. 23, August 2, 2006, accessed July 7, 2011. Sweeping too fast, however, causes a drop in displayed amplitude and a shift in the displayed frequency." ", p. 22, Figure 2–14, August 2, 2006, accessed July 7, 2011. Also, the animation contains both up- and down-converted spectra, which is due to a frequency mixer producing both sum and difference frequencies. The local oscillator feedthrough is due to the imperfect isolation from the intermediate frequency|IF signal path in the Frequency mixer|mixer. For very weak signals, a pre-amplifier is used, although total harmonic distortion|harmonic and intermodulation distortion may lead to the creation of new frequency components that were not present in the original signal. File:3D battery charger RF spectrum over time.jpg|thumb|right|350px|3D plot: 600 seconds RF spectrum over time from a battery charger  With an FFT based spectrum analyzer, the frequency resolution is <math>\Delta\nu=1/T</math>, the inverse of the time "T" over which the waveform is measured and Fourier transformed. With Fourier transform analysis in a digital spectrum analyzer, it is necessary to sample the input signal with a sampling frequency <math>\nu_s</math> that is at least twice the bandwidth of the signal, due to the Nyquist rate|Nyquist limit. A Fourier transform will then produce a spectrum containing all frequencies from zero to <math>\nu_s/2</math>. This can place considerable demands on the required analog-to-digital converter and processing power for the Fourier transform, making FFT based spectrum analyzers limited in frequency range. Image:Aaronia Spectrum Analyzer Software.jpg|thumb|right|350px|Frequency spectrum of the heating up period of a switching power supply (spread spectrum) incl. spectrogram over a few minutes  Since FFT based analyzers are only capable of considering narrow bands, one technique is to combine swept and FFT analysis for consideration of wide and narrow spans. This technique allows for faster sweep time. This method is made possible by first down converting the signal, then digitizing the intermediate frequency and using superheterodyne or FFT techniques to acquire the spectrum. One benefit of digitizing the intermediate frequency is the ability to use digital filters, which have a range of Digital filter#Comparison of analog and digital filters|advantages over analog filters such as near perfect shape factors and improved filter settling time. Also, for consideration of narrow spans, the FFT can be used to increase sweep time without distorting the displayed spectrum. Image:Spectrum Analyser Time Domain Sampling and Blind Time.png|thumb|left|400px|Illustration showing Spectrum Analyzer Blind Time  A realtime spectrum analyser does not have any blind time—up to some maximum span, often called the "realtime bandwidth". The analyser is able to sample the incoming RF spectrum in the time domain and convert the information to the frequency domain using the FFT process. FFT's are processed in parallel, gapless and overlapped so there are no gaps in the calculated RF spectrum and no information is missed. = In a sense, any spectrum analyzer that has vector signal analyzer capability is a realtime analyzer. It samples data fast enough to satisfy Nyquist Sampling theorem and stores the data in memory for later processing. This kind of analyser is only realtime for the amount of data / capture time it can store in memory and still produces gaps in the spectrum and results during processing time. = Minimizing distortion of information is important in all spectrum analyzers. The FFT process applies windowing techniques to improve the output spectrum due to producing less side lobes. The effect of windowing may also reduce the level of a signal where it is captured on the boundary between one FFT and the next. For this reason FFT's in a Realtime spectrum analyzer are overlapped. Overlapping rate is approximately 80%. An analyzer that utilises a 1024-point FFT process will re-use approximately 819 samples from the previous FFT process." ", p. 6, March, 2015, accessed February 9, 2018. = This is related to the sampling rate of the analyser and the Fast Fourier transform|FFT rate.  It is also important for the realtime spectrum analyzer to give good level accuracy. Example: for an analyser with  of realtime Bandwidth (signal processing)|bandwidth (the maximum RF span that can be processed in realtime) approximately  (complex) are needed.  If the spectrum analyzer produces  an FFT calculation is produced every   For a  FFT a full spectrum is produced  approximately every   This also gives us our overlap rate of 80% (20 μs − 4 μs) / 20 μs = 80%. Image:Comparison of Max Hold Spectrum Analyzer trace and Persistence Trace.png|thumb|left|400px|Comparison between Swept Max Hold and Realtime Persistence displays == Realtime spectrum analyzers are able to produce much more information for users to examine the frequency spectrum in more detail. A normal swept spectrum analyzer would produce max peak, min peak displays for example but a real ...
