Sporting Life}}   | founders = David Russell, Patti Russell, Brian McGrath | location = Toronto, Ontario, Canada | website =  }} "Sporting Life" is a sporting retailer shop based in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Sporting Life sells sporting goods specially made for running|runners, cycling|cyclers, skiing|skiers, snowboarders, and hiking|hikers. ==History== Sporting life was founded in 1979 as a privately owned company by David, Patti Russell (husband and wife), and Brian McGrath. The three co-founders are enthusiast skiers at a private club and are actively involved in picking merchandise, with Mr. Russell into sports equipment, Ms. Russell on with fashion; and Mr. McGrath focused on footwear. In 2011, there were 270 full-time staff and 600 employees. Fairfax Financial|Fairfax Financial Holdings Limited bought a 75% share in the company in late 2011, with the founders retaining the remaining balance of shares., Fairfax press release, 2011 Sporting Life originally had four locations until their 2014 expansion. Their flagship store is located at 2665 Yonge Street, just south of Lawrence Avenue, and it contains 36,000 square feet over two stories, having been recently expanded in 2011. Their 2454 Yonge Street location sells mainly bikes and snowboards, with a limited selection of apparel. They also have a 42,0000-square-foot anchor space at Sherway Gardens, which relocated to a new wing in 2015 as part of the mall's expansion and renovation, while the original location was replaced by Nordstrom in 2017. There is also a 10,000-square-foot location in Collingwood, Ontario|Collingwood, situated near Blue Mountain (ski resort)|Blue Mountain, which was initially their only store outside Toronto., Sporting Life In 2008, Sporting Life launched its e-commerce website.  The co-founders of Sporting Life sold a 75% stake to Fairfax in late 2011 in order to fund the retailer's expansion. The plan was to open two stores a year, with suggested locations in Vancouver, Edmonton, Calgary, and Montreal, each store being in the 30,000-50,000 square foot range. Sporting Life's fifth and sixth locations opened in 2014, the first time in 14 years that they had opened a new store. Sporting Life had bought Ottawa-based Tommy & Lefebvre on June 25, 2013, and moved their staff from the Bank Street (Ottawa)|Bank Street location to their new store at a reconstructed Lansdowne Park in October 2014., CBC, 25 June 2013, "Ottawa Citizen", 26 June 2013 Another Sporting Life opened at the newly renovated CF Markville|Markville in September 2014, replacing a Sport Chek. Sporting Life opened their seventh store at Hillcrest Mall in spring 2016, on the site of the former Hudson's Bay (retailer)|The Bay "Men's Store and Home" store; after The Bay had consolidated its two separate mall locations into a newly expanded central space. Two more stores opened in 2017; one at Yorkdale Shopping Centre in part of the space previously occupied by Sears Canada, and another at Calgary's CF Market Mall. In October 2018, Sporting Life opened their first store outside Ontario and Alberta at Quartier Dix30, in Brossard, Quebec. In November 2019, Sporting Life expanded into British Columbia and opened first store in Burnaby|Greater Vancouver at Brentwood Mall. In late October of 2022 Sporting Life will open 3 new stores located at Carrefour Laval Shopping Centre in Quebec, Mapleview Mall in Ontario and Southgate Mall in Alberta.  This will bring their store total to 13 stores plus e-commerce.   At maturity Sporting Life will grow to 18 stores by 2027. ==Clientele== Sporting Life stocks outerwear, athleticwear, footwear, bikes, skis, snowboards and lifestyle apparel. It carries luxury labels such as Moncler, Nobis, Moose Knuckles and Canada Goose.  Sporting Life was one of the first North American retailers of Canada Goose. Sporting Life's clientele include moderately prices brands like Nike and adidas as well as catering to the upmarket and enthusiast.  This is the differentiator to other Canadian sporting goods retailer, Sport Chek, which caters to a more casual audience as well being common in Canadian shopping plazas and malls. Sporting Life's annual sales are reported to be under $200 million but this is unconfirmed as the company is privately held and does not make its financial statements public. Co-founder David Russell suggested that Sport Check and Sporting Life were not direct competitors, saying “Typically, our price points take over where theirs end”. Due to its few locations and unique premium product selection, Sporting Life has been considered a destination shop in Toronto. At its flagship store, the parking lot is reportedly full on weekends despite having a parking attendant and has often stalled traffic on Yonge Street south of Lawrence. It is extremely popular during Boxing Day and Black Friday (shopping)|Black Friday, with huge lineups of customers waiting to enter. , Sporting Life  Sporting Life is also known for sponsoring the Sporting Life 10K run which starts at its flagship store and takes the route of Yonge Street; the 2013 edition sold out with 27,000 participants raising $2.2 million. ==Sporting Life 10K==  |remarks      = }} The "Sporting Life 10K" is an annual 10K running/walking event on Yonge Street in Toronto, that has taken place every May since 2003. Money raised from the Sporting Life 10K goes towards funding Camp Oochigeas – a volunteer-run summer camp to provide enriching experiences to victims of childhood cancer. 27,000 people participated in 2013. ==References==   Category:Challenge walks Category:Sporting goods retailers of Canada Category:Companies based in Toronto Category:Retail companies established in 1979
