    "Stargate Project" was a secret U.S. Army unit established in 1978 at Fort George G. Meade|Fort Meade, Maryland, by the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) and SRI International (a California contractor) to investigate the potential for psychic phenomena in military and domestic intelligence applications. The Project, and its precursors and sister projects, originally went by various code names'Gondola Wish', 'Stargate', 'Grill Flame', 'Center Lane', 'Project CF', 'Sun Streak', 'Scanate' until 1991 when they were consolidated and rechristened as "Stargate Project". Stargate Project's work primarily involved remote viewing, the purported ability to psychically "see" events, sites, or information from a great distance.Marks, David. (2000). "The Psychology of the Psychic" (2nd Edition). Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books. pp. 71–96.  The project was overseen until 1987 by Lt. Frederick Holmes "Skip" Atwater, an aide and "psychic headhunter" to Maj. Gen. Albert Stubblebine, and later president of the Monroe Institute.Atwater, F. Holmes (2001), "Captain of My Ship, Master of My Soul: Living with Guidance"; Hampton Roads Publishing Company The unit was small scale, comprising about 15 to 20 individuals, and was run out of "an old, leaky wooden barracks". The Stargate Project was terminated and declassified in 1995 after a CIA report concluded that it was never useful in any intelligence operation. Information provided by the program was vague and included irrelevant and erroneous data, and there were suspicions of inter-judge reliability.that is, information sufficiently valuable or compelling so that action was taken as a result.}} The program was featured in the The Men Who Stare at Goats|2004 book and The Men Who Stare at Goats (film)|2009 film, both titled "The Men Who Stare at Goats",Alex Heard|Heard, Alex (10 April 2010), , "U-T San Diego|Union-Tribune San Diego", Union-Tribune Publishing Co. : "This so-called "remote viewing" operation continued for years, and came to be known as Star Gate."David Clarke (journalist)|Clarke, David (2014), , London: Bloomsbury Publishing, p. 112.: "The existence of the Star Gate project was not officially acknowledged until 1995... then became the subject of investigations by journalists Jon Ronson ... Ronson's 2004 book, "The Men Who Stare at Goats", was subsequently adapted into a 2009 movie..."Michael Shermer|Shermer, Michael (November 2009),  @ Michaelshermer.com.:"... the U.S. Army had invested $20 million in a highly secret psychic spy program called Star Gate. ... In "The Men Who Stare at Goats" Jon Ronson tells the story of this program, how it started, the bizarre twists and turns it took, and how its legacy carries on today."Stanley Krippner|Krippner, Stanley and Harris L. Friedman (2010), , Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger/Greenwood Publishing Group, p. 154: "The story of Stargate was recently featured in a film based on the book "The Men Who Stare at Goats", by British investigative journalist Jon Ronson (2004)". although neither mentions it by name. ==Background== Information in the United States on psychic research in some foreign countries was poorly detailed, based mostly on rumor or innuendo from second-hand or tertiary reporting, attributed to both reliable and unreliable disinformation sources from the Soviet Union. The CIA and DIA decided they should investigate and know as much about it as possible. Various programs were approved yearly and re-funded accordingly.  Reviews were made semi-annually at the Senate and House Select or special committee (United States)|select committee level. Work results were reviewed, and remote viewing was attempted with the results being kept secret from the "viewer". It was thought that if the viewer was shown they were incorrect it would damage the viewer's confidence and skill. This was standard operating procedure throughout the years of military and domestic remote viewing programs. Feedback to the remote viewer of any kind was rare; it was kept classified and secret. Remote viewing attempts to sense unknown information about places or events. Normally it is performed to detect current events, but during military and domestic intelligence applications viewers claimed to sense things in the future, experiencing precognition. == History ==  In 1970 United States intelligence sources believed that the Soviet Union was spending 60 million Soviet rouble#Sixth Soviet ruble, 1961 - 1991|roubles annually on "Electronic harassment|psychotronic" research.  In response to claims that the Soviet program had produced results, the CIA initiated funding for a new program known as SCANATE ("scan by coordinate") in the same year.  Remote viewing research began in 1972 at the SRI International|Stanford Research Institute (SRI) in Menlo Park, California.  Proponents (Russell Targ and Harold Puthoff) of the research said that a minimum accuracy rate of 65% required by the clients was often exceeded in the later experiments. Physicists Russell Targ and Harold Puthoff began testing psychics for SRI in 1972, including one who would later become an international celebrity, Israeli Uri Geller. Their apparently successful results garnered interest within the U.S. Department of Defense. Ray Hyman, professor of psychology at the University of Oregon, was asked by Air Force psychologist Lt. Col. Austin W. Kibler (1930–2008)then Director of Behavioral Research for DARPA|ARPAto go to SRI and investigate. He was to specifically evaluate Geller. Hyman's report to the government was that Geller was a "complete fraud" and as a consequence Targ and Puthoff lost their government contract to work further with him. The result was a publicity tour for Geller, Targ, and Puthoff to seek private funding for further research work on Geller.Interview, Ray Hyman, in "An Honest Liar", a 2014 documentary film by Left Turn Films; Pure Mutt Productions; Part2 Filmworks. (The quoted remarks commence at 21 min, 45 sec.) One of the project's successes was the location of a lost Soviet spy plane in 1976 by Rosemary Smith, a young administrative assistant recruited by project director Dale Graff. In 1977 the Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence (ACSI) Systems Exploitation Detachment (SED) started the Gondola Wish program to "evaluate potential adversary applications of remote viewing."  Army Intelligence then formalized this in mid-1978 as an operational program Grill Flame , based in buildings 2560 and 2561 at Fort George G. Meade|Fort Meade, in Maryland (INSCOM "Detachment G").  In early 1979 the research at SRI was integrated into 'Grill Flame', which was redesignated INSCOM 'Center Lane' Project (ICLP) in 1983. In 1984 the existence of the program was reported by Jack Anderson (columnist)|Jack Anderson, and in that year it was unfavorably received by the National Academy of Sciences National Research Council (United States)|National Research Council.  In late 1985 the Army funding was terminated, but the program was redesignated 'Sun Streak' and funded by the DIA's Scientific and Technical Intelligence Directorate (office code DT-S).  In 1991 most of the contracting for the program was transferred from SRI to Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), with Edwin May controlling 70% of the contractor funds and 85% of the data.  Its security was altered from Special Access Program (SAP) to Limited Dissemination (LIMDIS), and it was given its final name, STARGATE.  In 1995 the defense appropriations bill directed that the program be transferred from DIA to CIA oversight.  The CIA commissioned a report by the American Institutes for Research (AIR) that found that remote viewing had not been proved to work by a psychic mechanism, and said it had not been used operationally. The CIA subsequently cancelled and declassified the program.<!--- I left a better version of this paragraph at Russell Targ, should recover and reuse here ---> In 1995 the project was transferred to the Central Intelligence Agency|CIA and a retrospective evaluation of the results was done. The appointed panel consisted primarily of Jessica Utts and Ray Hyman. Hyman had produced an unflattering report on Uri Geller and SRI for the government two decades earlier, but the psychologist David Marks (psychologist)|David Marks found Utts' appointment to the review panel "puzzling" given that she had published papers with Edwin May, considering this joint research likely to make her "less than partial". A report by Utts claimed the results were evidence of psychic functioning; however, Hyman in his report argued Utts's conclusion that ESP had been proven to exist, especially precognition, was premature and the findings had not been independently replicated.  by Ray Hyman. Hyman came to the conclusion: <blockquote>Psychologists, such as myself, who study subjective validation find nothing striking or surprising in the reported matching of reports against targets in the Stargate data. The overwhelming amount of data generated by the viewers is vague, general, and way off target. The few apparent hits are just what we would expect if nothing other than reasonable guessing and subjective validation are operating. by Ray Hyman; "Skeptical Inquirer", Vol. 20.2, Mar/Apr 1996.</blockquote> A later report by AIR came to a negative conclusion. Joe Nickell has written: <blockquote>Other evaluators – two psychologists from AIR – assessed the potential intelligence-gathering usefulness of remote viewing. They concluded that the alleged psychic technique was of dubious value and lacked the concreteness and reliability necessary for it to be used as a basis for making decisions or taking action. The final report found "reason to suspect" that in "some well publicised cases of dramatic hits" the remote viewers might have had "substantially more background information" than might otherwise be apparent. by Joe Nickell; "Skeptical Inquirer", Vol. 11.1, Mar 2001.</blockquote> According to AIR, which performed a review of the project, no remote viewing report ever provided actionable information for any intelligence operation. Based upon the collected findings, which recommended a higher level of critical research and tighter controls, the CIA terminated the 20 million dollar project, citing a lack of documented evidence that the program had any value to the intelligence community. "Time" magazine stated in 1995 three full-time psychics were still working on a $500,000-a-year budget out of Fort Meade, Maryland, which would soon close. David Marks in his book "The Psychology of the Psychic" (2000) discussed the flaws in the Stargate Project in detail.  Marks wrote that there were six negative design features of the experiments. The possibility of cues or sensory leakage was not ruled out, no Reproducibility|independent replication, some experiments were conducted in secret, making peer-review impossible. Marks noted that the judge Edwin May was also the principal investigator for the project and this was problematic, making a huge conflict of interest with collusion, cuing and fraud being possible. Marks concluded the project was nothing more than a "subjective delusion" and after two decades of research it had failed to provi ...
