  The "style and title of the Canadian sovereign" is the formal mode of address of the Monarchy of Canada|monarch of Canada. The form is based on those that were inherited from the United Kingdom and France, used in the colonies to refer to the reigning monarch in Europe. As various Canadian territories changed ownership and then the country gradually gained independence, the Style (manner of address)|style and Title#Titles for heads of state|title of the monarchs changed almost as often as the kings and queens themselves. The mode of address currently employed is a combination of a style that originates in the early 17th century and a title established by Canadian law in 1953. ==Current style and titles==  In 1953, a year after the accession to the throne of Queen Elizabeth II, the Parliament of Canada|Canadian parliament passed the Royal Style and Titles Act (Revised Statutes of Canada|R.S.C., 1985, c. R-12), providing for the parliament's consent to the issuance of a royal proclamation changing the monarch's title being then used. The relevant royal proclamation was issued on May 28, published in the Canada Gazette, volume 87, number 6, Extra, 29 May 1953, pages 1–2 just days before Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II|her coronation. As of the accession of Charles III in 2022, the sovereign's style and titles in Canada are, in Canadian English|English: <div style="padding:1px; text-align:left; margin:auto; border:1px solid #7BA05B; color:#000000; width:70%;">}}</div> And in Canadian French|French: <div style="padding:1px; text-align:left; margin:auto; border:1px solid #7BA05B; color:#000000; width:70%;">}}</div> The style and titles were composed during the reign of Elizabeth II to distinctly mention Canada so as to highlight the monarch's shared status, being both monarch of Canada and, separately, Monarchy of the United Kingdom|of the United Kingdom, as well as the six (today 13) other Commonwealth realms; with emphasis showing the distinct title "Queen" (now "King") "of Canada" as embedded in the longer formal title. When composed for Elizabeth II in 1953, this format was consistent with the monarch's titles in her other realms. Only Canada retains this title; all others, aside from the UK itself, removed the reference to the United Kingdom. The monarch is typically addressed by the title "King of Canada" and is expected to allude to himself as King of Canada when in or acting abroad on behalf of that country. For example, Elizabeth II said in 1973: "...it is as Queen of Canada that I am here, Queen of Canada and of all Canadians, not just of one or two ancestral strains." Since the title was adopted, the Government of Canada|federal government has promoted its use as a signifier of Canada's sovereign and independent status; Prime Minister of Canada|Prime Minister John Diefenbaker said of the title in 1957: "The Queen of Canada is a term which we like to use because it utterly represents her role on this occasion." The title is also included in the Oath of Allegiance (Canada)|Oath of Allegiance, which forms a part of the Oath of Citizenship (Canada)|Oath of Citizenship, and can be found as —Latin for "Elizabeth II by the Grace of God Queen, Canada"—on the obverse of various medals in the Orders, decorations, and medals of Canada|Canadian honours system; this wording is expected to change in light of the accession of Charles III. Although the King's Canadian titles include "Defender of the Faith"/, neither the monarch nor any of the viceroys have an official religious role in Canada. Unlike in the United Kingdom, where the term (, in Latin) signifies the sovereign's position as Supreme Governor of the Church of England and a member and defender of the security of the Church of Scotland, there have been no established churches in Canada since before Canadian Confederation|its confederation in 1867. "Defender of the Faith" thus has a more vague meaning in the Canadian title, alluding only to the monarch's belief in a higher power. Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent stated on this matter in his 1953 contribution to the debate on the Royal Style and Titles Act in the House of Commons of Canada|House of Commons: "The rather more delicate question arose about the retention of the words defender of the faith... In our countries  there are no established churches, but in our countries there are people who have faith in the direction of human affairs by an all-wise Providence; and we felt that it was a good thing that the civil authorities would proclaim that their organization is such that it is a defence of the continued beliefs in a supreme power that orders the affairs of mere men, and that there could be no reasonable objection from anyone who believed in the Supreme Being in having the sovereign, the head of the civil authority, described as a believer in and a defender of the faith in a supreme ruler." Also, while the sovereign holds the nominal title "Head of the Commonwealth", this does not imply any political power over member states of the Commonwealth of Nations. In keeping, however, with the declaration of the prime ministers of the Commonwealth in London in 1949 of "the King as the symbol of the free association of its independent member nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth," the title will pass to the next monarch upon the demise of the Crown and in fact did so in 2022, though any future change is not a guaranteed certainty. ==Style of address==  The use of the styles of address "Highness" and "Majesty" Forms of address in the United Kingdom#Royalty|originated in the United Kingdom, where they were used from the 12th century onward. During the reign of James I of England|James VI of Scotland and I of England and Ireland, however, "Majesty" became the official style, to the exclusion of all others, and it was then brought to North America during colonial times through usage in reference to the Monarchy of the United Kingdom|British monarch, who then had sovereignty over the British North America|colonies on that continent. Its usage has continued since Canada became a Monarchy|kingdom in its own right in 1867, and after a process of constitutional evolution ending with full sovereignty from the United Kingdom, is now applied to the Canadian monarch. Unlike in the United Kingdom, where the sovereign is referred to in treaties and on British passports as "His  Britannic Majesty", the sovereign in Canada is referred to simply as "His  Majesty" (). However, from time to time, the style will be "His  Canadian Majesty" so as to differentiate from foreign sovereigns. Canadian styles of address are officially maintained by the Department of Canadian Heritage's Protocol Office. ==History== Following Canadian Confederation, Prime Minister of Canada John A. Macdonald, having been denied the name "Kingdom of Canada" for the new country, was repeatedly heard to refer to Queen Victoria as the "Queen of Canada", and, similarly, in the lead up to the coronation of King Edward VII in 1902, Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier desired to have the words "King of Canada" included in the royal title by the time of the ceremony. This wish was not fulfilled, however, and Canada inherited the full British title when the country gained legislative independence from the United Kingdom in 1931. File:Official Diamond Jubilee Portrait of the Queen of Canada.jpg|thumb|left|Elizabeth II, the first Canadian monarch to be titled "Queen of Canada" () Liberal Party of Canada|Liberal Member of Parliament (Canada)|Member of Parliament Eugène Marquis in 1945 tabled a motion in the House of Commons proposing that a change to the King's title be a subject of discussion at the next Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference; Marquis suggested that the title include each of the King's dominions, giving him the designation "King of Canada".{{Citation| title=King of Canada| newspaper=Ottawa Citizen| page=15| date=7 November 1945| url=https://news.google.com/newspapers ...
