     File:Thamestunnel.jpg|thumb|upright=1.3|Inside the Thames Tunnel in the mid-19th century The "Thames Tunnel" is a tunnel beneath the River Thames in London, connecting Rotherhithe and Wapping. It measures  wide by  high and is  long, running at a depth of  below the river surface measured at high tide. It is the first tunnel known to have been constructed successfully underneath a navigable river. to have been successfully constructed underneath a navigable river, the Babylonians may have constructed the Euphrates Tunnel nearly 4,000 years earlier.}} It was built between 1825 and 1843 by Marc Isambard Brunel|Marc Brunel and his son Isambard Kingdom Brunel|Isambard using the tunnelling shield newly invented by the elder Brunel and Thomas Cochrane, 10th Earl of Dundonald|Thomas Cochrane. The tunnel was originally designed for horse-drawn carriages, but was mainly used by pedestrians and became a tourist attraction. In 1869 it was converted into a railway tunnel for use by the East London line which, since 2010, is part of the London Overground railway network under the ownership of Transport for London. ==History and development==  At the start of the 19th century, there was a pressing need for a new land connection between the north and south banks of the Thames to link the expanding docks on each side of the river. The engineer Ralph Dodd tried, but failed, to build a tunnel between Gravesend, Kent|Gravesend and Tilbury in 1799.John Timbs, "Stories of Inventors and Discoverers in Science and the Useful Arts", p. 287, Kent, 1860 Between 1805–1809, a group of Cornish people|Cornish miners, including Richard Trevithick, tried to dig a tunnel further upriver between Rotherhithe and Wapping/Limehouse, but failed because of the difficult conditions of the ground. The Cornish miners were used to hard rock and did not modify their methods for soft clay and quicksand. This Thames Archway project was abandoned after the initial pilot tunnel (a 'driftway') flooded twice when  of a total of  had been dug.Denis Smith, "London and the Thames Valley", p. 17, Thomas Telford, 2001 It only measured  by , and was intended as a drain for a larger tunnel for passenger use. The failure of the Thames Archway project led engineers to conclude that "an underground tunnel is impracticable".Nathan Aaseng, "Construction: Building the Impossible", p. 28, The Oliver Press, Inc., 1999 The Anglo-French engineer Marc Brunel refused to accept this conclusion. In 1814 he proposed to Alexander I of Russia|Emperor Alexander I of Russia a plan to build a tunnel under the river Neva in St Petersburg. This scheme was turned down (a bridge was built instead) and Brunel continued to develop ideas for new methods of tunnelling. Brunel patented the tunnelling shield, a revolutionary advance in tunnelling technology, in January 1818. In 1823 Brunel produced a plan for a tunnel between Rotherhithe and Wapping, which would be dug using his new shield. Financing was soon found from private investors, including the Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington|Duke of Wellington, and a Thames Tunnel Company was formed in 1824, the project beginning in February 1825. The first step was the construction of a large shaft on the south bank at Rotherhithe,  back from the river bank. It was dug by assembling an iron ring  in diameter above ground. A brick wall  high and  thick was built on top of this, with a powerful steam engine surmounting it to drive the excavation's pumps. The whole apparatus was estimated to weigh . The soil below the ring's sharp lower edge was removed manually by Brunel's workers. The whole shaft thus gradually sank under its own weight, slicing through the soft ground rather like an enormous pastry cutter. The shaft became stuck at one point during its sinking, as the pressure of the earth around it held it firmly in position. Extra weight was required to make it continue its descent. 50,000 bricks were added as temporary weights. It was realised that the problem was caused because the shaft's sides were parallel. Years later when the Wapping shaft was built, it was slightly wider at the bottom than the top. This non-cylindrical tapering design ensured it did not get stuck. By November 1825 the Rotherhithe shaft was in place and tunnelling work could begin. File:Thames tunnel shield.png|upright=1.2|right|thumb|The shield in use during construction File:Brunel-shield.JPG|upright=1|right|thumb|A scale model of the tunnelling shield at the Brunel Museum at Rotherhithe The tunnelling shield, built at Henry Maudslay's Lambeth works and assembled in the Rotherhithe shaft, was the key to Brunel's construction of the Thames Tunnel. The "Illustrated London News" described how it worked:  Each of the twelve frames of the shield weighed over . The key innovation of the tunnelling shield was its support for the unlined ground in front and around it to reduce the risk of collapses. However, many workers, including Brunel himself, soon fell ill from the poor conditions caused by filthy sewage-laden water seeping through from the river above. This sewage gave off methane gas which was ignited by the miners' oil lamps. When the resident engineer, John Armstrong (engineer)|John Armstrong, fell ill in April 1826, Marc's son Isambard Kingdom Brunel took over at the age of 20. Work was slow, progressing at only  a week. To earn income from the tunnel, the company directors allowed sightseers to view the shield in operation. They charged a shilling for the adventure and an estimated 600–800 visitors took advantage of the opportunity every day. The excavation was hazardous. The tunnel flooded suddenly on 18 May 1827 after  had been dug. Isambard Kingdom Brunel lowered a diving bell from a boat to repair the hole at the bottom of the river, throwing bags filled with clay into the breach in the tunnel's roof. Following the repairs and the drainage of the tunnel, he held a banquet inside it. = The tunnel flooded again the following year, on 12 January 1828, in which six men died. Isambard was extremely lucky to survive this. The six men had made their way to the main stairwell, as the emergency exit was known to be locked. Isambard instead made for the locked exit. A contractor named Beamish heard him there and broke the door down, and an unconscious Isambard was pulled out and revived. He was sent to Brislington, near Bristol, to recuperate. There he heard about the competition to build what became the Clifton Suspension Bridge. Financial problems followed, leading in August to the tunnel being walled off just behind the shield and then abandoned for seven years. = File:Thamestunnel1840.jpg|thumb|center|upright=2.2|The Thames Tunnel excavation as it was, probably around 1840 File:Thames Tunnel-route.png|thumb|upright=1.1|Underground route and approaches (highlighted in red) to the Thames Tunnel In December 1834 Marc Brunel succeeded in raising enough money, including a loan of £247,000 from HM Treasury|the Treasury,  to continue construction. Starting in August 1835 the old rusted shield was dismantled and removed. By March 1836 the new shield, improved and heavier, was assembled in place and boring resumed."The Brunels' Tunnel" 2006,  Impeded by further floods, (23 August and 3 November 1837, 20 March 1838, 3 April 1840) fires and leaks of methane and hydrogen sulfide|hydrogen sulphide gas, the remainder of the tunnelling was completed in November 1841, after another five and a half years. The extensive delays and repeated flooding made the tunnel the butt of metropolitan humour:  The Thames Tunnel was fitted out with lighting, roadways and spiral staircases during 1841–1842. An engine house on the Rotherhithe side, which now houses the Brunel Museum, was also constructed to house machinery for draining the tunnel. The tunnel was finally opened to the public on 25 March 1843.  File:Thamestunnelshaft.gif|right|thumb|The entrance shaft to the Thames Tunnel Although it was a triumph of civil engineering, the Thames Tunnel was not a financial success. It had cost £454,000 to dig and another £180,000 to fit out &ndash; far exceeding its initial cost estimates. Proposals to extend the entrance to accommodate wheeled vehicles failed owing to cost, and it was used only by pedestrians. It became a major tourist attraction, attracting about two million people a year, each paying a penny to pass through,William Allen Drew, "Glimpses and Gatherings During a Voyage and Visit to London and the Great Exhibition in the Summer of 1851", pp. 242–249. Homan & Manley, 1852 and became the subject of popular songs. The American traveller William Allen Drew commented that "No one goes to London without visiting the Tunnel" and described it as the "Eighth Wonder of the World|eighth wonder of the world". When he saw it for himself in 1851, he pronounced himself "somewhat disappointed in it" but still left a vivid description of its interior, which was more like an underground marketplace than a transport artery:  It is impossible to pass through without purchasing some curiosity. Most of the articles are labelled &ndash; "Bought in the Thames Tunnel" &ndash; "a present from the Thames Tunnel&q ...
