 "Two Gentlemen of Verona" (musical)|the 2000 album|2 Gentlemen in Verona"2 Gentlemen in Verona"}}    File:Scene from (Kauffmann).jpg|thumb|upright=1.3|"Two Gentlemen of Verona" by Angelica Kauffman (1789) ""The Two Gentlemen of Verona"" is a Shakespearean comedy|comedy by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written between 1589 and 1593. It is considered by some to be Shakespeare's first play, and is often seen as showing his first tentative steps in laying out some of the themes and motifs with which he would later deal in more detail; for example, it is the first of his plays in which a heroine dresses as a boy. The play deals with the themes of friendship and infidelity, the conflict between friendship and love, and the foolish behaviour of people in love. The highlight of the play is considered by some to be Launce, the clownish domestic worker|servant of Proteus, and his dog Crab, to whom "the most scene-stealing non-speaking role in the Shakespeare's plays|canon" has been attributed. "Two Gentlemen" is often regarded as one of Shakespeare's weakest plays. It has the smallest named cast of any play by Shakespeare. ==Characters==  * Valentine – young man living in Verona * Proteus – his closest friend * Silvia – falls in love with Valentine in Milan * Julia – in love with Proteus in Verona * Duke of Milan – Silvia's father * Lucetta – Julia's Lady-in-waiting|waiting woman * Antonio – Proteus' father * Thurio – foolish rival to Valentine for Silvia * Eglamour – aids in Silvia's escape * Speed – a clownish servant to Valentine * Launce – Proteus's servant * Panthino – Antonio's servant * Host – of the inn where Julia lodges in Milan * Outlaws * Crab – Launce's dog * Servants * Musicians  ==Summary== File:Silvia - Charles Edward Perugini.jpg|thumb|left|upright=0.70|"Silvia" by Charles Edward Perugini (1888) As the play begins, Valentine is preparing to leave Verona for Milan so as to broaden his horizons. He begs his best friend, Proteus, to come with him, but Proteus is in love with Julia, and refuses to leave. Disappointed, Valentine bids Proteus farewell and goes on alone. Meanwhile, Julia is discussing Proteus with her maid, Lucetta, who tells Julia that she thinks Proteus is fond of her. Julia, however, acts coyly, embarrassed to admit that she likes him. Lucetta then produces a letter. She will not say who gave it to her, but teases Julia that it was Valentine's servant, Speed, who brought it from Proteus. Julia, still unwilling to reveal her love in front of Lucetta, angrily tears up the letter. She sends Lucetta away, but then, realising her own rashness, she picks up the fragments of the letter and kisses them, trying to piece them back together. Meanwhile, Proteus' father has decided that Proteus should travel to Milan and join Valentine. He orders that Proteus must leave the next day, prompting a tearful farewell with Julia, to whom Proteus swears eternal love. The two exchange rings and vows and Proteus promises to return as soon as he can. In Milan, Proteus finds Valentine in love with the Duke's daughter, Silvia. Despite being in love with Julia, Proteus falls instantly in love with Silvia and vows to win her. Unaware of Proteus' feelings, Valentine tells him the Duke wants Silvia to marry the foppish but wealthy Thurio, against her wishes. Because the Duke suspects that his daughter and Valentine are in love, he locks her nightly in a tower, to which he keeps the only key. However, Valentine tells Proteus that he plans to free her by means of a corded ladder, and together, they will elope. Proteus immediately informs the Duke, who subsequently captures and exile|banishes Valentine. While wandering outside Milan, Valentine runs afoul of a band of outlaws, who claim they are also exiled gentlemen. Valentine lies, saying he was banished for killing a man in a fair fight, and the outlaws elect him their leader. File:Valentine Rescuing Sylvia from Proteus.jpg|thumb|"Valentine Rescuing Silvia from Proteus" by William Holman Hunt (1851) Meanwhile, in Verona, Julia decides to join her lover in Milan. She convinces Lucetta to dress her in boy's clothes and help her fix her hair so she will not be harmed on the journey. Once in Milan, Julia quickly discovers Proteus' love for Silvia, watching him attempt to serenade her. She contrives to become his Page (servant)|page boy – Sebastian – until she can decide upon a course of action. Proteus sends Sebastian to Silvia with a gift of the ring that Julia gave to him before he left Verona, but Julia learns that Silvia scorns Proteus' affections and is disgusted he would forget his love back home, i.e. Julia herself. Silvia deeply mourns the loss of Valentine, who Proteus has told her is rumoured dead. Not persuaded of Valentine's death, Silvia determines to flee the city with the help of Sir Eglamour. They escape into the forest but when they are confronted by the outlaws, Eglamour flees and Silvia is taken captive. The outlaws head to their leader (Valentine), but on the way, they encounter Proteus and Julia (still disguised as Sebastian). Proteus rescues Silvia, and then pursues her deeper into the forest. Secretly observed by Valentine, Proteus attempts to persuade Silvia that he loves her, but she rejects his advances. Proteus insinuates that he will rape her ("I'll force thee yield to my desire"), but at this point, Valentine intervenes and denounces Proteus. Horrified at what has happened, Proteus vows that the hate Valentine feels for him is nothing compared to the hate he feels for himself. Convinced that Proteus' repentance is genuine, Valentine forgives him and seems to offer Silvia to him. At this point, overwhelmed, Julia faints, revealing her true identity. Upon seeing her, Proteus suddenly remembers his love for her and vows fidelity to her once again. The Duke and Thurio are brought as prisoners by the outlaws. Seeing Silvia, Thurio claims her as his, but Valentine warns Thurio that if he makes one move toward her, he will kill him. Terrified, Thurio renounces Silvia. The Duke, disgusted with Thurio's cowardice and impressed by Valentine's actions, approves his and Silvia's love, and consents to their marriage. The two couples are happily united, and the Duke pardons the outlaws, telling them they may return to Milan. ==Sources== File:The boke named the Gouernour.jpg|thumb|upright=0.70|left|First page of "The Book of the Governor|The Boke Named the Governour" by Thomas Elyot (1531) In writing "The Two Gentlemen of Verona", Shakespeare drew on the Spanish prose romance "Diana (pastoral romance)|Los Siete Libros de la Diana" ("The Seven Books of the Diana") by the Portuguese writer Jorge de Montemor|Jorge de Montemayor. In the second book of "Diana", Don Felix, who is in love with Felismena, sends her a letter explaining his feelings. Like Julia, Felismena pretends to reject the letter, and be annoyed with her maid for delivering it. Like Proteus, Felix is sent away by his father, and is followed by Felismena, who, disguised as a boy, becomes his page, only to subsequently learn that Felix has fallen in love with Celia. Felismena is then employed by Felix to act as his messenger in all communications with Celia, who scorns his love. Instead, Celia falls in love with the page (i.e. Felismena in disguise). Eventually, after a combat in a wood, Felix and Felismena are reunited. Upon Felismena revealing herself however, Celia, having no counterpart to Valentine, dies of grief. "Diana" was published in Spanish in 1559 and translated into French by Nicholas Collin in 1578. An English translation was made by Bartholomew Young and published in 1598, though Young claims in his preface to have finished the translation sixteen years earlier (c. 1582). Shakespeare could have read a manuscript of Young's English translation, or encountered the story in French, or learned of it from an anonymous English play, "The History of Felix and Philomena", which may have been based on "Diana", and which was performed for the court (royal)|court at Palace of Placentia|Greenwich Palace by the Queen Elizabeth's Men|Queen's Men on 3 January 1585. "The History of Felix and Philiomena" is now Lost works|lost. File:Euphues. The anatomy of wit.jpg|thumb|upright=0.70|A 1587 printing of John Lyly's "Euphues|Euphues, The Anatomy of Wit" Another major influence on Shakespeare was the story of the intimate friendship of Titus and Gisippus as told in Thomas Elyot's "The Book of the Governor|The Boke Named the Governour" in 1531 (the same story is told in "The Decameron" by Giovanni Boccaccio, but verbal similarities between "The Two Gentlemen" and "The Governor" suggest it was Elyot's work Shakespeare used as his primary source, not Boccaccio's). In this story, Titus and Gisippus are inseparable until Gisippus falls in love with Sophronia. He introduces her to Titus, but Titus is overcome with jealousy and vows to seduce her. Upon hearing of Titus' plan, Gisippus arranges for them to change places on the wedding night, thus placing their friendship above his love. Also important to Shakespeare in the composition of the play was John Lyly's "Euphues|Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit", published in 1578. Like "The Governor", "Euphues" presents two close friends who are inseparable until a woman comes between them, and, like both "The Governor" and "Two Gentlemen", the story concludes with one friend sacrificing the woman so as to save the friendship. However, as Geoffrey Bullough argues "Shakespeare's debt to Lyly was probably one of technique more than matter." Lyly's "Midas (Lyly play)|Midas" may also have influenced the scene where Launce and Speed run through the milkmaid's virtues and defects, as it contains a very similar scene between Lucio and Petulus. Other minor sources include Arthur Brooke (poet)|Arthur Brooke's narrative poem "The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet". Obviously Shakespeare's source for "Romeo and Juliet", it features a character called Friar Laurence, as does "Two Gentlemen", and a scene where a young man attempts to outwit his lover's father by means of a corded ladder (as Valentine does in "Two Gentlemen"). Philip Sidney's "The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia" may also have influenced Shakespeare insofar as it contains a character who follows her betrothed, dressed as his page, and later on, one of the main characters becomes captain of a group of Helots. ==Date and text==  File:First-page-first-folio-two-gentlemen.jpg|thumb|left|First page of "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" from the "First Folio" (1623) The exact date of composition of "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" is unknown, but it is generally believed to have been one of Shakespeare's earliest works.See , ,  and  The first evidence of its existence is in a list of Shakespeare's plays in Francis Meres's "Palladis Tamia", published in 1598, but it is thought to have been written in the early 1590s. Clifford Leech, for example, argues for 1592/1593; G. Blakemore Evans places the date at 1590–1593; Gary Taylor (scholar)|Gary Taylor suggests 1590–1591; Kurt Schlueter posits the late 1580s; William C. Carroll suggests 1590–1592; Roger Warren tentatively suggests 1587, but acknowledges 1590/1591 as more likely. It has been argued that "Two Gentlemen" may have been Shakespeare's first work for the stage. This theory was first suggested by Edmond Malone in 1821, in the "Third Variorum" edition of Shakespeare's plays, edited by James Boswell (1778–1822)|James Boswell based on Malone's notes. Malone dated the play 1591, a modification of his earlier 1595 date from the third edition of "The Plays of William Shakespeare". At this time, the dominant theory was that the "Henry VI" trilogy had been Shakespeare's first work. More recently, the play was placed first in "The Oxford Shakespeare|The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works" of 1986, and again in the 2nd edition of 2005, in "The Norton Shakespeare" of 1997, and again in the 2nd edition of 2008, and in "The Complete Pelican Shakespeare" of 2002. A large part of the theory that this may be Shakespeare's first play is the quality of the work itself. Writing in 1968, Norman Sanders argued "all are agreed on the play's immaturity." The argument is that the play betrays a lack of practical theatrical experience on Shakespeare's part, and as such, it must have come extremely early in his career. Stanley Wells, for example, has written the "dramatic structure is comparatively unambitious, and while some of its scenes are expertly constructed, those involving more than, at the most, four characters betray an uncertainty of technique suggestive of inexperience." This uncertainty can be seen in how Shakespeare handles the distribution of dialogue in such scenes. Whenever there are more than three characters on stage, at least one of those characters tends to fall silent. For example, Speed is silent for almost all of act 2, scene 4, as are Thurio, Silvia and Julia for most of the last half of the final scene. It has also been suggested that the handling of the final scene in general, in which the faithful lover seemingly offers his beloved as a token of his forgiveness to the man who has just attempted to rape her, is a sign of Shakespeare's lack of maturity as a dramatist. In his 2008 edition of the play for the Oxford Shakespeare, Roger Warren argues that the play is the oldest surviving piece of Shakespearean literature, suggesting a date of composition as somewhere between 1587 and 1591. He hypothesizes that the play was perhaps written before Shakespeare came to London, with an idea towards using the famous comic actor Richard Tarlton in the role of Launce (this theory stems from the fact that Tarlton had performed several extremely popular and well known scenes with dogs). However, Tarlton died in September 1588, and Warren notes several passages in "Two Gentlemen" which seem to borrow from John Lyly's "Midas", which wasn't written until at least late-1589. As such, Warren acknowledges that 1590/1591 is most likely the correct date of composition.  The play was not printed until 1623 ...
