  File:Turul buda castle1.jpg|thumb|Turul bird on the Buda Castle|Royal Castle, Budapest, Hungary|450x450px The "Turul" is a mythological bird of prey, mostly depicted as a Falcon, in Hungarian mythology|Hungarian tradition and Turkic mythology|Turkic tradition, and a national symbol of Hungarians. ==Origin== The Turul is probably based on a large falcon. The Hungarian language  word "turul" meant one kind of falcon and the origin of the word is currently thought to be most likely Turkic languages|Turkic ("Clauson 1972: 472".Clauson, Sir Gerard. 1972. "An Etymological Dictionary of Pre-Thirteenth Century Turkish". Oxford: Clarendon Press.) ("Róna-Tas et al. 2011:2: 954-56)"Róna-Tas, András, Árpád Berta, with the assistance of László Károly (eds). 2011. "West Old Turkic", I-II. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.), which is the language of origin of over 10% of words in modern Hungarian lexicon and the exonym "Hungarian" and the word "Hun". are of Turkic origin. The majority of Hungarian tribal names were of Turkic origin. However, in spite of all this influence, and although they were long in contact with them, the Magyars are not a Turkic people. According to Constantine Porphyrogenitus, writing in his "De Administrando Imperio" (c. AD 950), "Patzinakia, the Pechenegs|Pecheneg realm, stretches west as far as the Siret River (or even the Carpathian Mountains|Eastern Carpathian Mountains), and is four days distant from Tourkia (i.e. Hungary)."A MAGYAROK TÜRK MEGNEVEZÉSE BÍBORBANSZÜLETETT KONSTANTINOS DE ADMINISTRANDOIMPERIO CÍMÛ MUNKÁJÁBAN - Takács Zoltán Bálint, SAVARIAA VAS MEGYEI MÚZEUMOK ÉRTESÍTÕJE28 SZOMBATHELY, 2004, pp. 317–333 }} "Toġrïl" or "toğrul" means a medium to large bird of prey of the family Accipitridae, Northern goshawk|goshawk or red kite.  In Hungarian the word "sólyom" means falcon, and there are three ancient words describing different kinds of falcons: "kerecsen"  (saker falcon), "zongor"  (which survives in the male name "Csongor") and "turul". In the legend of Emese, recorded in the "Gesta Hungarorum" and the "Chronicon Pictum", the "turul" is mentioned as occurring in a dream of Emese, when she was already pregnant. In older literature, this was interpreted as "impregnation", but the text is clear.For further details:  The Turul's role is one of a protector spirit, that protects the little baby Álmos, from harm. This is a very similar motif to the role of the Simurgh in the Iranian epic Shahnameh. In a second dream by the leader of the Hungarian tribes, in which eagles (the emblem of the Pechenegs, enemies of the Hungarians) attacked their horses and the Turul came and saved them.The image of the Turul and its role is similar to that of the Norse Veðrfölnir and eagle|Vedfolnir, which like it perched on the tree of life. The Huns reportedly also used the image of the eagle, which for them symbolized the leader. The image of a bird of prey was extremely popular in Saka-Scythian culture. More broadly, this image was common among the nomads of Central Asia. Rather than belonging to a specific ethnic group, it was widespread across the steppe, and the union of a falcon and a woman is "firmly located in a shamanic religio-mythical universe." A prominent example among similar legends is that of the Mongols, contained in "The Secret History of the Mongols", where Genghis Khan's mother-in-law dreams that an eagle holding the sun and the moon in its claws lands on her hand, in anticipation of the birth of the Mongolian royal dynasty. In some parts of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhs and Kyrgyz people|Kyrgyz carry falcons inside the yurt during childbirth, because their eyes are said to stave off demons that attack pregnant women during childbirth. Macdonald calls it a "practical use" of the falcons' association with fertility. A pair of silver disk with Turul motive was found in Rakamaz, Hungary from a 10th century Hungarian cemetery. The most beautiful ornament of noble Hungarians|Hungarian women was a pair of decorative disks hanging from the end of the hair braid.  <gallery class="center" widths="300" heights="300"> File:A rakamazi hajfonatkorong 1 - Turul.jpg|A pair of silver hair decoration disk with motive of mythic Turul bird from a 10th century Hungarian cemetery (Found in Rakamaz, Hungary) Jósa András Museum in Nyíregyháza, Hungary File:A rakamazi hajfonatkorong 2 - Turul.jpg|The other part of the pair of the silver hair decoration disk with motive of mythic Turul bird from a 10th century Hungarian cemetery (Found in Rakamaz, Hungary) File:Prehistoric Times of Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia - NM Prague 59.JPG|Gilt silver disk with Turul motif (Hungary, 10th century), National Museum (Prague)|National Museum in Prague (temporary exhibition) </gallery> ==Turul dynasty== In Hungarian tradition, it originated as the clan symbol used in the 9th and 10th centuries by the ruling Árpád dynasty.Chronicon Pictum, Gesta Hungarorum. Arnold Ipolyi, "Magyar mitológia" (Hungarian Mythology) 1854; Gáspár Heltai, Hungarian Mythology. " the hawk or "turul", which in shamanistic lore rested upon the tree of life connecting the earth with the netherworld and the skies, persevered for longer  as a device belonging to the ruling house. But even this was soon eclipsed by the symbol of the double cross and, around 1200, by the striped shield coloured in the red and white of Christ's Passion." Martyn C. Rady, , Palgrave Macmillan, 2000, p.12 The Árpád dynasty was the ruling dynasty of the Principality of Hungary in the 9th and 10th centuries and of the Kingdom of Hungary from 1000 to 1301. The Árpád dynasty is also referred to as the Turul dynasty.  The "Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum" mentioned that the Árpád dynasty descended from the "gens" (clan) Turul, and the "Gesta Hungarorum" recorded that the Árpád dynasty|Árpád's Totem|totemic ancestor was the Turul.Kristó 1994 "Korai" p. 693.  In the legend of Emese, recorded in the "Gesta Hungarorum" and the "Chronicon Pictum", the Turul is mentioned as occurring in a dream of Emese, when she was already pregnant. File:Emese álma.jpg|thumb|300x300px|Emese, mother of Álmos {{Blockquote|"Ügyek's son Előd, fathered a son by the daughter of Eunodubilia in Scythian land, whose name was Álmos, because a bird in the shape of a falcon appeared in his mother's dream when she  ...
