    | country       = United Kingdom | language      = English | website       = https://www.which.co.uk/ }} ""Which?"" is a United Kingdom brand name that promotes Informed consumer|informed consumer choice in the purchase of goods and services by testing products, highlighting inferior products or services, raising awareness of consumer rights, and offering independent advice. The brand name is used by the "Consumers' Association", a Registered charity in England|registered charity and private company limited by guarantee|company limited by guarantee that owns several businesses, including "Which? Financial Services Limited" ("Which? Mortgage Advisers"), "Which? Legal Limited" and "Which? Limited", which publishes the "Which?" Papers. The vast majority of the association's income comes from the profit it makes on its trading businesses, for instance subscriptions to "Which?" magazine, which are donated to the campaigning part of the organisation to fund advocacy activity and inform the public about consumer issues. "Which?" magazine maintains its independence by not accepting advertising, and the organisation receives no government funding. The Consumers' Association is the largest consumer organisation in the UK, with over 573,000 subscribers to its magazine. Until 2006, the association used prize draws similar to those of "Reader's Digest" to attract subscribers, but following criticism they were discontinued. The Association attracts subscribers to its publications with free mini-guides and trial offers. ==History and background== The organisation was set up in 1957  as a response to the changing values and concerns of the post-war era, at a time of rapid changes in product markets and consumer behaviour – and a corresponding growth in sharp trading practices. To combat this, Michael Young, Baron Young of Dartington|Michael Young, research director for the Labour Party (UK)|Labour Party, proposed setting up a 'Consumer Advisory Service' to be considered for the party's 1950 manifesto, only to be rejected by Harold Wilson. Encouraged by the efforts of Dorothy Goodman|Dorothy Bruchholz Goodman, of the United States, and her British husband Raymond J. Goodman,http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/756961468914425842/pdf/640280NEWS0Ban00Offical0Use0Only010.pdf  Young continued to push the idea and in October 1957 the first "Which?" magazine was published from a converted garage in Bethnal Green.Which? magazine, October 2007, p. 3. Its central aim was to improve the standard of goods and services available to the public in the UK. Under the editorship of Eirlys Roberts, the publication started as a small 32-page magazine that included reports on electric kettles, sunglasses, aspirin, cake-mixes, scouring powders, no-iron cottons and British cars. By 1959, membership reached 150,000 and a membership services office in Hertford."50 years of Which?" supplement. Which? magazine, October 2007 In 1960, "Which?" helped to found the International Organisation of Consumer Unions, later Consumers International. In 1962, coverage expanded with the launch of the first quarterly "Which? car" supplement, which becomes "Motoring Which?" in 1965, followed by "Money Which?" in 1968. In 1970, "Which?" bought a set of buildings in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, to set up labs to test products including domestic appliances, DIY equipment, and consumer electronics. Previously, the work had been contracted out. The 1970s saw "Which?" taking a greater campaigning role, and it began to adopt a more aggressive stance on issues such as lead poisoning and aircraft noise. In 1971, for example, "Which?" published the first league table on the tar and nicotine content of cigarettes. In 1973, Maurice Healy (campaigner)|Maurice Healy succeeded Eirlys Roberts as editor, and became editor-in-chief for all the Which? magazines, before he left in 1977 to join the National Consumer Council. The organisation also dabbled in high street consumer advice centres during the 1970s. More than 120 such centres were operating in 1977–78, many of them funded by local councils. The centres closed as funding was withdrawn by the government in 1980. "Which?" continued campaigning on consumer safety issues, with its car safety test results strengthening calls to legislate car manufacturers to fit seat belts in all new cars, helping to make it compulsory to Clunk Click Every Trip in 1983. In 1992, "Which?" launched another satellite publication, this one aimed at youngsters aged 11–15, called Check It Out!, but it failed to take off and closed in June 1994. In 1995 testing facilities were moved to Milton Keynes where they remained until 2002, when the majority of the "Which?" testing activities were contracted out. "Which?" Online, the first incarnation of the Which? website, was launched in 1996 which incorporated its own ISP, email and content in addition to the Which Online Forum - an area accessible to members which offered unfettered access to members of the senior management within Which? including the Directors. The trading organisation was rebranded as "Which?" in 2004 and this is the brand promoted to the general public. However the charity the Consumers' Association continues to own Which? Ltd and retains its own name. Following the deregulation of the gas and electricity industry, "Which?" launched a free online energy comparison service called "Switch with Which?" in 2005, to compare energy tariffs. The service was awarded Energywatch Confidence Code accreditation in 2006. In the 2010 Superbrands index, "Which?" ranked fifth in the "Media — Newspapers and Magazines" category and 256th overall. ==Product testing== "Which?" carries out systematic testing of consumer products and financial services, the results of which are published in reports in "Which? magazine" and on the "Which?" website. Tests are carried out on goods, services, and suppliers. Testing covers reliability engineering|reliability, performance, safety, energy efficiency and value-for-money, as relevant in different cases. Top-rated products are awarded the "Which?" 'Best Buy' status logo, an accreditation recognised by Private industry|industry and consumers. "Which?" first used the phrase in its second magazine edition in 1958, to describe Boots 365 talcum powder. Conversely, the worst-performing products are labelled 'Don't Buys'. ""Which?" awards" The Which? Awards is an annual event to 'celebrate the UK's best products and services, from cars and restaurants to supermarkets and financial services'. Award winners are selected by Which? staff, based on test findings and feedback from Which? members throughout the year. "Unusual test subjects" As well as the usual household products, "Which?" has tested things such as: * Bird seed for budgerigars in 1959 * Contraceptives in 1963 * Paper dresses in 1967 * Pets in 1977"Which? magazine", August 1977 ==Publications== Most "Which?" publications are supplied only to subscribers, and are not on general sale. "Which?" magazine, started in 1957, is the organisation's principal publication. The magazine reports on consumer issues of the day, publishes product testing results and findings of original research and investigations. The magazine also discusses trading which it believes goes against the interests of consumers. Examples of such discussions include an exposé into solar panel heating installation companies,"Which? magazine", May 2010 an undercover enquiry with the Action on Hearing Loss|RNID revealing serious problems at shops selling hearing aids"Which? magazine", October 2010 and an investigation into electronics shop staffs' knowledge of the products that they sell."Which? magazine", February 2011 Other publications include "Which? Travel", "Which? Car", "Which? Money", "Which? Computing" and "Which? Gardening". ==Finances== File:Consumers' Association financial history five years to 30 June 2012.jpg|thumbnail|right|Consumers' Association financial history five years to 30 June 2012Consumers' Association financial history. www.charitycommission.gov.uk, 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014.  The Consumer's Association experienced sharply increased income up to 2014, and since then has shown steady figures. ==Policy, consultation and parliamentary lobbying== Which? regularly briefs and lobbies MPs, Peers, AMs, MLAs, MSPs and MEPs on national, European and international consumer issues. For example, Which? successfully lobbied to put an end to the '65-day rule' that allowed energy companies to wait 65 days before informing their customers of a price change.  Following the creation of the Scottish parliament in 1999, in January 2002 Which? established an office in Edinburgh. Which? also works with the European Consumers' Bureau|European Consumers' Association (BEUC)  which brings together over forty consumer organisations from across Europe to represent common consumer interests within the EU institutions. ==Legal powers==  The Consumers' Association has the power under The Enterprise Act 2002 to take action on behalf of consumers, including the ability to bring a super-complaint to the Financial Conduct Authority|Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). Which? is one of five organisations able to issue a super-complaint. The Consumers' Association was among the first groups granted these new powers, and was among the  ...
