      "White nationalism" is a type of racial nationalism or pan-nationalism which espouses the belief that white people are a Race (human categorization)|raceHeidi Beirich and Kevin Hicks. "Chapter 7: White nationalism in America". In Perry, Barbara. "Hate Crimes". Greenwood Publishing, 2009. pp.114–115 and seeks to develop and maintain a white racial and national identity.Heidi Beirich and Kevin Hicks. "Chapter 7: White Nationalism in America". In Perry, Barbara. "Hate Crimes". Greenwood Publishing, 2009. p.119. "One of the primary political goals of white nationalism is to forge a white identity".. The New York Times. 21 November 2016. "White nationalism, he said, is the belief that national identity should be built around white ethnicity, and that white people should therefore maintain both a demographic majority and dominance of the nation’s culture and public life.... white nationalism is about maintaining political and economic dominance, not just a numerical majority or cultural hegemony". Many of its proponents identify with and are attached to the concept of a white nation, or a "white ethnostate". In this paper, nationalism is termed "identity content" and patriotism "relational orientation". White nationalists say they seek to ensure the survival of the white race, and the cultures of historically white State (polity)|states. They hold that white people should maintain their majority in majority-white countries, maintain their political and economic dominance, and that their cultures should be foremost in these countries. Many white nationalists believe that miscegenation, Criticism of multiculturalism|multiculturalism, immigration of nonwhites and Sub-replacement fertility|low birth rates among whites are threatening the white race. Analysts describe white nationalism as overlapping with white supremacism and white separatism.Daniszewski, John. . Associated Press. 15 August 2017. White nationalism is sometimes described as a euphemism for, or subset of, white supremacism, and the two have been used interchangeably by journalists and analysts. White separatism is the pursuit of a "white-only state", while supremacism is the belief that white people are superior to nonwhites and should dominate them, taking ideas from social Darwinism and Nazism. Critics argue that the term "white nationalism" is simply a "rebranding", and ideas such as white pride exist solely to provide a sanitized public face for "white supremacy", which white nationalists allegedly avoid using because of its negative connotations, and that most white nationalist groups promote racial violence. ==History and usage== According to Merriam-Webster, the first documented use of the term "white nationalist" was 1951, to refer to a member of a militant group which espouses white supremacy and racial segregation. Merriam-Webster also notes usage of the two-word phrase as early as 1925. According to Dictionary.com, the term was first used in the title of a 1948 essay by South African writer and ecologist Thomas Chalmers Robertson titled "Racism Comes to Power in South Africa: The Threat of White Nationalism". According to Daryl Johnson, a former counterterrorism expert at the Department of Homeland Security, the term was used to appear more credible while also avoiding negative stereotypes about white supremacists. Modern members of racist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan generally favor the term and avoid self-describing as white supremacist. Some sociologists have used white nationalism as an umbrella term for a range of white supremacist groups and ideologies, while others regard these movements as distinct. Analysis suggests that two groups largely overlap in terms of membership, ideology, and goals. Civil rights groups have described the two terms as functionally interchangeable. Ryan Lenz of the Southern Poverty Law Center has said "there is really no difference",Durkee cites:  and Kristen Clarke of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law has said "There is no defensible distinction that can be drawn between white supremacy, white nationalism or white separatism in society today." News reports will sometimes refer to the a group or movement by one term or the other, or both interchangeably. ==Views== White nationalists claim that culture is a product of race, and advocate for the self-preservation of white people. White nationalists seek to ensure the survival of the white race, and the cultures of historically white nations. They hold that white people should maintain their majority in mainly-white countries, maintain their dominance of its political and economic life, and that their culture should be foremost. Many white nationalists believe that miscegenation, Criticism of multiculturalism|multiculturalism, mass immigration of non-whites and Sub-replacement fertility|low birth rates among whites are threatening the white race, and some argue that it amounts to White genocide conspiracy theory|white genocide. Political scientist Samuel P. Huntington described white nationalists as arguing that the demographic shift in the United States towards non-whites would bring a new culture that is intellectually and morally inferior. White nationalists claim that this demographic shift brings affirmative action, immigrant ghettos and declining educational standards.Despite new leaders, and with them new tactics and new ideas, the goal of white separatists remains to convince Americans that racial separation is the only way to survive. National Public Radio (14 August 2003) Most American white nationalists say immigration should be restricted to people of European ancestry.Dating the White Way "Newsweek" 9 August 2004 White nationalists embrace a variety of religious and irreligion|non-religious beliefs, including various Christian denominations|denominations of Christianity, generally Protestant, although some specifically overlap with white nationalist ideology (Christian Identity, for example, is a family of white supremacist denominations), Germanic neopaganism (e.g. Wotanism) and atheism.  Most white nationalists define white people in a restricted way.  In the United States, it often—though not exclusively—implies European ethnic groups|European ancestry of non-Jewish descent. Some white nationalists draw on 19th-century Scientific racism|racial taxonomy. White nationalist Jared Taylor has argued that Jews can be considered "white", although this is controversial within white nationalist circles. Many white nationalists oppose Israel and Zionism, while some, such as William Daniel Johnson and Taylor, have expressed support for Israel and have drawn p ...
