  1826 (aged 51–52) | disappeared_place = Near Youngstown, New York  | spouse      =  | children    = 2 | known_for   = Anti-Masonic writings | occupation  = Stone cutter<br>Bricklayer<br>Storekeeper<br>Author }} "William Morgan" (born 1774 – disappeared  1826) was a resident of Batavia, New York, whose disappearance and presumed murder in 1826 ignited a powerful movement against the Freemasons, a fraternal society that had become influential in the United States. After Morgan announced his intention to publish a book exposing Freemasonry's secrets, he was arrested on trumped-up charges. He disappeared soon after and was believed to have been kidnapped and killed by Masons from western New York. The allegations surrounding Morgan's disappearance and presumed death sparked a public outcry and inspired Thurlow Weed and others to harness the discontent by founding the new Anti-Masonic Party in opposition to President Andrew Jackson's Democratic Party (United States)|Democrats.  It ran a presidential candidate in 1832 but was nearly defunct by 1835.History (U.S. TV channel)|The History Channel, "Mysteries of the Freemasons: America", video documentary, 1 August 2006, written by Noah Nicholas and Molly Bedell == Early life and education == Morgan was born in Culpeper, Virginia, in 1774. His birth date is sometimes given as August 7, but no definite source for this is cited. He worked as a bricklayer and stone cutter and later used his savings to open a store in Richmond, Virginia|Richmond."The Proceedings of the United States Antimasonic Convention, Held at Philadelphia, September 11, 1830. Embracing the Journal of Proceedings, the reports, the Debates, and the Address to the People", Published by I. P. Trimble, Philadelphia "et al." 1830. 164 pp. ==Military service== Morgan told friends and acquaintances that he had served with distinction as a Captain (United States O-3)|captain during the War of 1812, and his associates in upstate New York appear to have accepted this claim.  Several men named William Morgan appear in the Virginia militia rolls for this period, but none held the rank of captain, and whether Morgan actually served in the war has not been determined with certainty. ==Marriage and family== In October 1819, when he was in his mid-40s, Morgan married 19-year-oldCompton, Todd (1997), "In Sacred Loneliness: The Plural Wives of Joseph Smith", Salt Lake City: Signature Books, p.44, 52. List of Joseph Smith's wives|Lucinda Pendleton in Richmond, Virginia|Richmond, Virginia. They had two children: Lucinda Wesley Morgan and Thomas Jefferson Morgan. Two years after his marriage, Morgan moved his family to York, Upper Canada, where he operated a brewery.  When his business was destroyed in a fire, Morgan was reduced to poverty. He returned with his family to the United States, settling first at Rochester, New York, and later in Batavia, where he again worked as a bricklayer and stonecutter. Nineteenth-century local histories described Morgan as a heavy drinker and a gambler,, Vermont Freemasons, Online version characterizations disputed by Morgan's friends and supporters. == Book on Freemasonry == Morgan claimed to have been made a Master Mason while he was living in Canada, and he appears to have briefly attended a lodge in Rochester. In 1825, Morgan received the Royal Arch Masonry|Royal Arch degree at Le Roy (village), New York|Le Roy's Western Star Chapter Number 33, having declared under oath that he had previously received the six degrees that preceded it. It has never been established if he actually received these degrees and, if so, from which lodge. Morgan then attempted unsuccessfully to help establish or visit lodges and chapters in Batavia, but he was denied participation by members who disapproved of his character and even questioned his claims to Masonic membership. Morgan finally announced that he was going to publish an exposé titled "Illustrations of Masonry", critical of the Freemasons and revealing their secret degree ceremonies in detail. Morgan declared that a local newspaper publisher, David Cade Miller, had given him a sizable advance for the work. Miller is said to have received the entered apprentice degree (the first degree of Freemasonry), but had been stopped from advancement by the objection of Batavia lodge members. Morgan was promised one-fourth of the profits, and the financial backers of the venture—Miller, John Davids (Morgan's landlord), and Russel Dyer—entered into a $500,000 penal bond with Morgan to guarantee its publication. == Disappearance == Since Masons place their hands on a Bible and promise not to reveal the passwords and grips of the degrees, several members of the Batavia lodge published an advertisement denouncing Morgan for breaking his word by authoring the book. An attempt was also made to set fire to Miller's newspaper office and print shop. On September 11, 1826, Morgan was arrested for supposed nonpayment of a loan and allegedly stealing a shirt and a tie; according to the laws of the time he could be held in debtors' prison until restitution was made, which would have made it more difficult to publish his book. Morgan was jailed in Canandaigua (city), New York|Canandaigua, and when Miller learned of this, he went to the jail to pay the debt and secure Morgan's release. Morgan was released, but then re-arrested and charged with supposedly failing to pay a two dollar tavern bill.}} While the jailer was away, a group of men convinced his wife to release Morgan; they walked to a waiting carriage, which arrived two days later at Fort Niagara.  Shortly afterwards, Morgan disappeared. There are conflicting accounts of what happened next. The generally accepted version of events is that Morgan was taken in a boat to the middle of the Niagara River and thrown overboard, where he presumably drowned, since he was never seen again in the community.[http://www.truevine.n ...
