     File:Airbus A350-941 F-WWCF MSN002 blended winglet ILA Berlin 2016 08.jpg|thumb|The Airbus A350 wingtip File:737-NG winglet effect (simplified).svg|thumb|Line drawing of wingtip vortices behind a conventional wingtip (on the left) and a blended winglet (on the right) "Wingtip devices" are intended to improve the efficiency of fixed-wing aircraft by reducing drag (physics)|drag. Although there are several types of wing tip devices which function in different manners, their intended effect is always to reduce an aircraft's drag by partial recovery of the tip vortex energy. Wingtip devices can also improve aircraft handling characteristics and enhance safety for following aircraft. Such devices increase the effective aspect ratio (wing)|aspect ratio of a wing without greatly increasing the wingspan. Extending the span would lower lift-induced drag, but would increase parasitic drag and would require boosting the strength and weight of the wing. At some point, there is no net benefit from further increased span. There may also be operational considerations that limit the allowable wingspan (e.g., available width at Gate (airport)|airport gates). Wingtip devices help prevent the flow around the wingtip of higher pressure air under the wing flowing to the lower pressure surface on top  at the wingtip, which results in a vortex caused by the forward motion of the aircraft, the winglet also reduces the lift-induced drag caused by wingtip vortices, and improves lift-to-drag ratio. This increases fuel efficiency in powered aircraft and increases cross-country speed in glider (sailplane)|gliders, in both cases increasing Range (aircraft)|range. U.S. Air Force studies indicate that a given improvement in fuel efficiency correlates directly with the causal increase in the aircraft's lift-to-drag ratio. == Early history ==  File:Blohm Voss Ha 137 side view.jpg|thumb|right|The Hamburger Flugzeugbau Ha 137|Ha 137 prototype aircraft, fitted with vertical wing extensions, c.1935–1937 The initial concept dates back to 1897, when English engineer Frederick W. Lanchester patented wing end-plates as a method for controlling wingtip vortices. In the United States, Scottish-born engineer William E. Somerville patented the first functional winglets in 1910. Somerville installed the devices on his early biplane and monoplane designs. Vincent Burnelli received US Patent no: 1,774,474 for his "Airfoil Control Means" on August 26, 1930. Simple flat end-plates did not cause a reduction in drag, because the increase in profile drag was greater than the decrease in induced drag.  File:Heinkel He 162 CASM 2012 5 (cropped).jpg|thumb|Heinkel He 162A with "Lippisch-Ohren" wingtip devices Following the end of World War II, Dr. Sighard F. Hoerner was a pioneer researcher in the field, having written a technical paper published in 1952 that called for drooped wingtips whose pointed rear tips focused the resulting wingtip vortex away from the upper wing surface. Drooped wingtips are often called "Hoerner tips" in his honor. Gliders and light aircraft have made use of Hoerner tips for many years. The earliest-known implementation of a Hoerner-style downward-angled "wingtip device" on a jet aircraft was during World War II.  This was the so-called "Lippisch-Ohren" (Lippisch-ears), allegedly attributed to the Messerschmitt Me 163's designer Alexander Lippisch, and first added to the M3 and M4 third and fourth prototypes of the Heinkel He 162A "Spatz" jet light fighter for evaluation.  This addition was done in order to counteract the dutch roll characteristic present in the original He 162 design, related to its wings having a marked Dihedral (aeronautics)|dihedral angle.  This became a standard feature of the approximately 320 completed He 162A jet fighters built, with hundreds more He 162A airframes going unfinished by V-E Day. == Winglet == File:Winglet with attached tufts of an KC-135A.jpg|thumb|Winglet on KC-135 Stratotanker with attached Tuft (aeronautics)|tufts showing airflow during NASA tests in 1979–1980 File:NASA GulfstreamV in wind tunnel.jpg|thumb|Gulfstream V model winglet Aeroelasticity|flutter tests at NASA Langley Research Center|Langley Subsonic and transonic wind tunnel|transonic wind tunnel The term "winglet" was previously used to describe an additional lifting surface on an aircraft, like a short section between wheels on fixed undercarriage. Richard T. Whitcomb|Richard Whitcomb's research in the 1970s at NASA first used winglet with its modern meaning referring to near-vertical extension of the wing tips. The upward angle (or "cant") of the winglet, its inward or outward angle (or "toe"), as well as its size and shape are critical for correct performance and are unique in each application. The wingtip vortex, which rotates around from below the wing, strikes the camber (aerodynamics)|cambered surface of the winglet, generating a force that angles inward and slightly forward, analogous to a sailboat sailing Points of sail|close hauled. The winglet converts some of the otherwise-wasted energy in the wingtip vortex to an apparent thrust. This small contribution can be worthwhile over the aircraft's lifetime, provided the benefit offsets the cost of installing and maintaining the winglets. Another potential benefit of winglets is that they reduce the intensity of wake vortices. Those trail behind the plane and pose a hazard to other aircraft. Minimum spacing requirements between aircraft operations at airports are largely dictated by these factors. Aircraft are Aircraft weight class|classified by weight (e.g. "Light", "Heavy", etc.) because the vortex strength grows with the aircraft lift coefficient, and thus, the associated turbulence is greatest at low speed and high weight, which produced a high angle of attack. Winglets and wingtip fences also increase efficiency by reducing vortex interference with laminar airflow near the tips of the wing, by 'moving' the confluence of low-pressure (over wing) and high-pressure (under wing) air away from the surface of the wing. Wingtip vortices create turbulence, originating at the leading edge of the wingtip and propagating backwards and inboard. This turbulence 'delaminates' the airflow over a small triangular section of the outboard wing, which destroys lift in that area. The fence/winglet drives the area where the vortex forms upward away from the wing surface, since the center of the resulting vortex is now at the tip of the winglet. Aircraft such as the Airbus A340 and the Boeing 747#747-400|Boeing 747-400 use winglets while other designs such as later versions of the Boeing 777 and the Boeing 747-8 have #Raked wingtip|raked wingtips.  The Fuel economy in aircraft|fuel economy improvement from winglets increases with the mission length.  Blended winglets allow a steeper angle of attack reducing takeoff distance.  Richard T. Whitcomb, an engineer at NASA's Langley Research Center, further developed Hoerner's concept in response to the sharp increase in the cost of fuel after the 1973 oil crisis. With careful aeronautical design he showed that, for a given bending moment, a near-vertical winglet offers a greater drag reduction compared to a horizontal span extension. Whitcomb's designs were flight-tested in 1979–80 by a joint NASA/Air Force team, using a KC-135 Stratotanker based at the Dryden Flight Research Center. A Lockheed L-1011 and McDonnell Douglas DC-10 were also used for testing, and the latter design was directly implemented by McDonnell Douglas on the derivative MD-11, which was rolled out in 1990. In May 1983, a high school student at Bowie High School (Maryland)|Bowie High School in Maryland won a grand prize at the 34th International Science and Engineering Fair in Albuquerque, New Mexico for the result of his research on wingtip devices to reduce drag. The same month, he filed a U.S. patent for "wingtip airfoils", published in 1986.patent   = NASA's most notable application of wingtip devices is on the Boeing 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft. Located on the 747's horizontal stabilizers, the devices increase the tailplane's effectiveness under the weight of the Space Shuttle orbiter, though these were more for directional stability than for drag reduction. = File:Learjet 28-29.jpg|thumb|A Learjet 28/29, the first commercial aircraft with winglets Learjet exhibited the prototype Learjet 28 at the 1977 National Business Aviation Association convention. It employed the first winglets ever used on a production aircraft, either civilian or military. Learjet developed the winglet design without NASA assistance. Although the Model 28 was intended to be a prototype experimental aircraft, performance was such that it resulted in a prod ...
