   | extinction =  | type = 501(c) organization|501(c)(3) organization | status = <!-- ad hoc, treaty, foundation, etc --> | purpose = <!-- focus as e.g. humanitarian, peacekeeping, etc --> | headquarters = New York City, United States | location =  | logo= World Jewish Congress.png | region_served = Worldwide | membership =  | language = <!-- official languages --> | leader_title = President | leader_name = Ronald S. Lauder | key_people = David René de Rothschild|David de Rothschild, Chairman of the Governing Board; Charlotte Knobloch, Vice President; Chella Safra, Treasurer | main_organ = Plenary Assembly | parent_organization = <!-- if one --> | affiliations = <!-- if any --> | num_staff =  | num_volunteers =  | budget =  | website =  | remarks = }}  File:World Jewish Congress Geneva 1953.jpg|thumb|World Jewish Congress in Geneva 1953 File:25 Years of World Jewish Congress - Anniversary Conference in Geneva, Switzerland.jpg|thumb|Delegates at World Jewish Congress 25th Anniversary Conference, Geneva, Switzerland, 1961 File:RonaldLauderWJCBudapestMay2013.jpg|thumb|World Jewish Congress President Ronald S. Lauder addressing the 14th Plenary Assembly of the World Jewish Congress in Budapest, 7 May 2013 The "World Jewish Congress" ("WJC") was founded in Geneva, Switzerland in August 1936 as an international federation of Jews|Jewish communities and organizations. According to its mission statement, the World Jewish Congress' main purpose is to act as "the diplomatic arm of the Jewish people." Membership in the WJC is open to all representative Jewish groups or communities, irrespective of the social, political or economic ideology of the community's host country. The World Jewish Congress headquarters are in New York City, and the organization maintains international offices in Brussels, Belgium; Jerusalem; Paris, France; Moscow, Russia; Buenos Aires, Argentina; and Geneva, Switzerland. The WJC has List of organizations with consultative status to the United Nations Economic and Social Council|special consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council. ==History== The World Jewish Congress was established in Geneva, Switzerland in August, 1936, in reaction to the rise of Nazism and the growing wave of European anti-Semitism. Since its foundation, it has been a permanent body with offices around the world. The main aims of the organization were "to mobilize the Jewish people and the democratic forces against the Nazi onslaught", to "fight for equal political and economic rights everywhere, and particularly for the Jewish minorities in Central and Eastern Europe", to support the establishment of a "Jewish National Home in Palestine" and to create "a worldwide Jewish representative body based on the concept of the unity of the Jewish people, democratically organized and able to act on matters of common concern".George Garai (ed.), World Jewish Congress, 40 Years in Action 1936–1976, Geneva 1976  The WJC's precursor organizations were the American Jewish Congress and the "Comité des Délégations Juives" (Committee of Jewish Delegations). The latter was established in March 1919 to represent Jewish communities at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919|Paris Peace Conference, and advocated for Jewish minority rights in various countries, including the negotiation of rights for Jews in Turkey in the Treaty of Sèvres (1920) and special agreements with smaller eastern European states. Headed by Russian Zionist Leo Motzkin, the "Comité des Délégations Juives" was composed of delegations from Palestine, the United States, Canada, Russia, Ukraine, Poland, East Galicia, Romania, Transylvania, Bukovina, Czechoslovakia, Italy, Yugoslavia, and Greece, and funded mainly by the World Zionist Organization.Unity in Dispersion: A History of the World Jewish Congress, World Jewish Congress, New York, 1948, pp. 26–28. However, the first impetus for the creation of the WJC came from the American Jewish Congress. In December 1917, the AJC adopted a resolution calling for the "convening of a World Jewish Congress", "as soon as peace is declared among the warring nations" in Europe.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York 1948, p. 22 In 1923, Motzkin visited the United States and addressed the AJC Executive Committee, "pleading for a World Conference of Jews to discuss the conditions of Jews in various lands and to devise ways and means for effective protection of Jewish rights."World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York 1948, p. 28 Conferences co-organized by Motzkin and the AJC leaders Julian Mack and Stephen Samuel Wise|Stephen Wise took place in 1926 in London and in 1927 in Zurich, Switzerland. The latter was attended by 65 Jews from 13 countries, representing 43 Jewish organizations, though the main Jewish groups in Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands, as well as the American Jewish Committee, declined the invitation to attend.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York 1948, p. 29 The First Preparatory World Jewish Conference was held in Geneva in August 1932. A preparatory committee was headed by Zionist Nahum Goldmann, who was one of the leading advocates of the establishment of an international Jewish representative body.Garai, pg. 10 and 20 Goldmann defined the purpose of the World Jewish Congress as follows: <blockquote>It is to establish the permanent address of the Jewish people; amidst the fragmentation and atomization of Jewish life and of the Jewish community; it is to establish a real, legitimate, collective representation of Jewry which will be entitled to speak in the name of the 16 million Jews to the nations and governments of the world, as well as to the Jews themselves.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York 1948, p. 33</blockquote> The conference approved plans to set up the new organization in 1934, with headquarters in New York and European offices in Berlin, Germany. In a manifesto, delegates called upon the Jewish people to unite as the only effective means of averting danger. The Jews, the declaration said, had to rely on their own power with the assistance of such enlightened sections of the world which had not yet been saturated with poisonous anti-Semitism. It added: "The World Jewish Congress does not aim at weakening any existing organizations, but rather to support and stimulate them." The new organization would be based on the "concept of the Jewish people as a national entity, and authorized and obligated to deal with all problems affecting Jewish life."World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York 1948, p. 34 In the summer of 1933, following the rise to power of Adolf Hitler and his NSDAP in Germany, American Jewish Congress President Bernard Deutsch called on US Jewish organizations to support the establishment of a World Jewish Congress "to prove the sincerity of their stand" in favor of the embattled Jews of Germany.  After two more preparatory conferences in 1933 and 1934, the First Plenary Assembly, held in Geneva in August 1936, established the World Jewish Congress as a permanent and democratic organization. Elections for delegates to that assembly had to be according to democratic principles, namely secret, direct, and based on proportional representation. The 52 American delegates, for instance, were chosen at an Electoral Convention which met in Washington, DC, on 13/14 June 1936 and which was attended by 1,000 representatives from 99 communities in 32 US states.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York, 1948, p. 46 The World Jewish Congress's expressed goal was Jewish unity and the strengthening of Jewish political influence in order to assure the survival of the Jewish people, which involved the creation of a Jewish state. 230 delegates representing 32 countries gathered for the first WJC assembly. Addressing a press conference in Geneva, Stephen S. Wise assailed German Jews for opposing the WJC. He said: "I must make clear that the congress is not a parliament nor an attempt at a parliament. It is nothing more than an assembly of representatives of those Jewries which choose to associate themselves in defense of Jewish rights. The congress will not be wholly representative until all Jews choose to be represented by it." File:Nahum Goldmann.jpg|thumb|Nahum Goldmann, co-founder and president of the World Jewish Congress from 1949 to 1977 Although the delegates elected the US federal judge and erstwhile president of the American Jewish Congress Julian Mack as honorary president of the WJC, Wise was appointed as chairman of the WJC Executive and thus "de facto" leader of the congress. Nahum Goldmann was named as chair of the Administrative Committee. The new WJC Executive immediately drew up a declaration asking the British government not to halt immigration into Palestine and presented it to British diplomats in Bern, Switzerland. The WJC chose Paris as its headquarters and also opened a liaison office to the League of Nations in Geneva, first headed by the Swiss international lawyer and WJC Legal Advisor Paul Guggenheim and later by Gerhart Riegner, who initially served as Guggenheim's secretary.Gerhart Riegner – Never Despair: Sixty Years in the Service of the Jewish People and of Human Rights, published by Ivan R. Dee, 2006 In its fight against growing anti-Semitism in Europe, the WJC pursued a two-pronged approach: the political and legal sphere (mainly the lobbying of the League of Nations and public statements) on the one hand, and an attempt to organize a boycott of products from countries such as Nazi Germany on the other. Given the weakness of the League of Nations vis-à-vis Germany and the successful efforts by the Nazi regime to stave off an economic boycott of German products, both approaches proved not very effective.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York, 1948, pp. 83–110 Following the November 1938 pogroms against Jews in Germany called Kristallnacht in which at least 91 Jews were killed and many synagogues and Jewish shops destroyed, the WJC issued a statement: "Though the Congress deplores the fatal shooting of an official of the German Embassy in Paris by a young Polish Jew of seventeen, it is obliged to protest energetically against the violent attacks in the German press against the whole of Judaism because of this act and, especially, to protest against the reprisals taken against the German Jews after the crime." With the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the WJC headquarters moved from Paris to Geneva to facilitate communications with Jewish communities in Europe. In the summer of 1940, by which time most of Europe had fallen under Nazi occupation, the World Jewish Congress's headquarters were moved to New York to share office space with the American Jewish Congress, and a special WJC office was set up in London. The British Section of the WJC was tasked with acting as the European representative of the organization.World Jewish Congress, Unity in Dispersion – A History of the World Jewish Congress, New York, 1948, pp. 122–123 Some of the personnel who worked in the WJC's European offices immigrated to the United States when the WJC moved its headquarters there. At the New York office in the 1940s, the major departments were: Political Department, Institute of Jewish Affairs (research and legal work), Relief and Rescue, Department for Culture and Education (or Culture Department), and Organization Department. In 1940, the WJC opened a representative office in Buenos Aires, Argentina.  The WJC's initial priorities included safeguarding Jewish minority rights, combating anti-Semitism in Europe, and providing emergency relief to Jews fleeing Nazi persecution. The WJC also concentrated on security for Jewish refugees and victims of the war. In 1939, the World Jewish Congress set up a relief committee for Jewish war refugees (RELICO) and cooperated with the Inte ...
