   | director = Akira Kurosawa | screenplay = }} | story = Akira Kurosawa | based_on = <!--  --> | producer =  }} | starring =  | narrator =  | cinematography = Kazuo Miyagawa | editing = Akira Kurosawa | music = Masaru Sato | studio =  | distributor = Toho | released =  | runtime = 110 minutes | country = Japan | language = Japanese | budget =  | gross = $2.5 million () }} |lead=yes}} is a 1961 Japanese Samurai cinema|samurai film co-written, produced, edited, and directed by Akira Kurosawa. The film stars Toshiro Mifune, Tatsuya Nakadai, Yoko Tsukasa, Isuzu Yamada, Daisuke Katō, Takashi Shimura, Kamatari Fujiwara, and Atsushi Watanabe (actor, born 1898)|Atsushi Watanabe.  In the film, a rōnin arrives in a small town where competing crime lords vie for supremacy. The two bosses each try to hire the newcomer as a bodyguard. Based on the success of "Yojimbo", Kurosawa's next film, "Sanjuro" (1962), was altered to incorporate the lead character of this film. In both films, the character wears a rather dilapidated dark kimono bearing the same family Mon (emblem)|"mon". The film was released and produced by Toho on April 25, 1961. "Yojimbo" received highly positive reviews, and, over the years, became widely regarded as one of the best films by Kurosawa and one of the greatest films ever made. The film grossed an estimated $2.5 million worldwide with a budget of ¥90.87 million. It was unofficially remade by Sergio Leone as the Spaghetti Western film "A Fistful of Dollars" (1964), leading to a lawsuit by Toho. ==Plot== In 1860, during the Bakumatsu|final years of the Edo period, a "rōnin" wanders through a desolate Japanese countryside. While stopping at a farmhouse for water, he overhears an elderly couple lamenting that their only son, not wanting to waste his life as a farmer, has run off to join the "gamblers" who have descended on a nearby town overrun with criminals and divided between two rival bosses.  The stranger heads to the town where he meets Gonji, the owner of a small "izakaya" who advises him to leave. He tells the rōnin that the two warring bosses, Ushitora and Seibei, are fighting over the lucrative gambling trade run by Seibei; Ushitora had been Seibei's right-hand man but rebelled when Seibei decided that his successor would be his son Yoichiro, a useless youth. The town's mayor, a silk merchant named Tazaemon, had long been in Seibei's pocket, so Ushitora aligned himself with the local sake brewer, Tokuemon, proclaiming him the new mayor.  After sizing up the situation and recognizing that no one in town cares about ending the violence, the stranger says he intends to stay, as the town would be better off with both sides dead. He first convinces the weaker Seibei to hire his services by effortlessly killing three of Ushitora's men. When asked his name, he sees a mulberry field and states his name is Kuwabatake Sanjuro (), where  Kuwabatake = "mulberry field" and where  Sanjuro ("thirty-years-old"). Seibei decides that with the ronin's swordsmanship, the time is right to deal with Ushitora. However, Sanjuro eavesdrops on Seibei's wife, who orders Yoichiro to prove himself by killing the ronin after the upcoming raid, saving them from having to pay him. Sanjuro leads the attack on the other faction, but then "resigns" over Seibei's treachery, expecting both sides to massacre each other. His plan is foiled due to the unexpected arrival of a "bugyō" (a government official), which gives both Seibei and Ushitora the opportunity to make a bloodless retreat and cease their war.   The "bugyō" leaves soon after to investigate the murder of a fellow official in another town. Sanjuro soon realizes that Ushitora sent two men to commit the murder when he overhears them discussing it in Gonji's tavern. With this knowledge, Sanjuro captures the killers and sells them to Seibei, but then tells Ushitora that it was Seibei's men who caught them. An alarmed Ushitora rewards him generously for his help and orders the kidnapping of Yoichiro, whom he offers in exchange for the two prisoners. However, Ushitora double-crosses Seibei at the swap when his brother, Unosuke, shoots the assassins with a pistol; anticipating this, Seibei reveals he had ordered the kidnapping of Tokuemon’s mistress. The next morning, she is exchanged for Yoichiro. Sanjuro learns that the woman, Nui, is the wife of a local farmer who lost her to Ushitora over a gambling debt; Ushitora then gave her away as Personal property|chattel to Tokuemon in order to gain his support. Sanjuro tricks Ushitora into revealing the safe house where Nui is hidden, then kills the guards posted there and reunites the woman with her husband and son, ordering them to leave town immediately. Pretending to be on Ushitora's side, Sanjuro is able to convince Ushitora that Seibei is responsible for killing his men. The gang war escalates, with Ushitora burning down Tazaemon's silk warehouse and Seibei retaliating by trashing Tokuemon's brewery. After some time, Unosuke becomes suspicious of Sanjuro and the circumstances surrounding Nui's escape, eventually uncovering evidence of the ronin's betrayal. Sanjuro is severely beaten and imprisoned by Ushitora's thugs, who torture him to find out Nui's whereabouts. Sanjuro manages to escape when Ushitora decides to eliminate Seibei once and for all. As he is being smuggled out of town in a coffin by Gonji, he witnesses the brutal end of Seibei and his family as their home is set on fire and they are all cut down while trying to surrender. Sanjuro recuperates in a small temple near a cemetery. However, when he learns that Gonji has been captured by Ushitora, he returns to town. Sanjuro confronts Ushitora, Unosuke, and their gang, taking on all of them by himself in a duel and killing them easily. He spares only one terrified young man, who turns out to be the youth he met on the way into town, and sends him back to his parents. As Sanjuro surveys the damage, Tazaemon comes out of his home, in a samurai outfit and beating a prayer drum. Driven mad, he circles around town and then goes after Tokuemon, stabbing him to death. Sanjuro frees Gonji, proclaims that the town will be quiet from then on, and departs. ==Cast==  * Toshiro Mifune as , a wandering ronin and master swordsman drawn into a gang war. * Eijirō Tōno as , the izakaya (tavern) owner and the ronin's ally and confidant. * Tatsuya Nakadai as , a gun-toting gangster and younger brother to both Ushitora and Inokichi. * Seizaburo Kawazu as , the original boss of the town's underworld. He operates out of a brothel. * Kyū Sazanka as , the other gang leader in town. He was originally Seibei's lieutenant but broke ranks to start his own syndicate in a succession dispute. * Isuzu Yamada as , the wife of Seibei and the brains behind her husband's criminal operations. * Daisuke Katō as , younger brother of Ushitora and older brother to Unosuke. He is a strong fighter, but is very dim-witted and easily fooled. * Takashi Shimura as , a sake brewer who claims to be the new mayor. * Hiroshi Tachikawa as , the timid son of Seibei and Orin who shows little inclination to take over his father's gang. * Yosuke Natsuki as Farmer's Son, a young man seen running away from home at the beginning of the film who joins Ushitora's gang. * Kamatari Fujiwara as , the town mayor and silk merchant who is going insane from fear. * Ikio Sawamura as , the town constable who is completely corrupt and concerned only with keeping himself alive. * Atsushi Watanabe (actor, born 1898)|Atsushi Watanabe as the town's coffin maker, who is profiting heavily from the gang war but ultimately chooses to help Sanjuro and Gonji put an end to it. * Susumu Fujita as , Seibei's "master swordsman" who deserts his employer before a battle with Ushitora's men, allowing Sanjuro to take his place. * Sachio Sakai as Ashigaru * Yoko Tsukasa as , the wife of Kohei. She was taken prisoner by Tokuemon because of her beauty after her husband could not pay back his gambling debts. * Yoshio Tsuchiya as , the husband of Nui who lost all of his money gambling and frequently gets beaten for trying to visit his wife. * Tsunagoro Rashomon as , Ushitora's tall enforcer.  ==Production==  Kurosawa stated that a major source for the plot was the 1942 "film noir" classic "The Glass Key (1942 film)|The Glass Key", an adaptation of Dashiell Hammett's 1931 novel "The Glass Key". It has been noted that the overall plot of "Yojimbo" is closer to that of another Hammett novel, "Red Harvest" (1929).  Kurosawa scholar David Desser, and film critic Manny Farber claim that "Red Harvest" was the inspiration for the film; however, Donald Richie and other scholars believe the similarities are coincidental. When asked his name, the samurai calls himself "Kuwabatake Sanjuro", which he seems to make up while looking at a mulberry field by the town. Thus, the character can be viewed as an early example of the "Man with No Name" (other examples of which appear in a number of earlier novels, including Dashiell Hammett's "Red Harvest").  Many of the actors in "Yojimbo" worked with Kurosawa before and after, especially Toshiro Mifune, Takashi Shimura and Tatsuya Nakadai.  After Kurosawa scolded Mifune for arriving late to the set one morning, Mifune made it a point to be ready on set at 6:00 AM every day in full makeup and costume for the rest of the film's shooting schedule. This was the second film where director Akira Kurosawa worked with cinematographer Kazuo Miyagawa. The sword instruction and choreography for the film were done by Yoshio Sugino of the Tenshin Shōden Katori Shintō-ryū and Ryū Kuze.  The soundtrack for the film has received positive reviews. Michael Wood (academic)|Michael Wood writing for the "London Review of Books" found the film's soundtrack by Masaru Sato as effective in its 'jaunty and jangling' approach stating:London Review of Books, Vol. 29 No. 4 · 22 February 2007, page 17, At the Movies, Michael Wood, "Yojimbo" directed by Akira Kurosawa. <blockquote>The film is full of music, for instance, a loud, witty soundtrack by Masaru Sato, who said his main influence was Henry Mancini. It doesn’t sound like "Breakfast at Tiffany’s", though, or "Days of Wine and Roses". The blaring Latin sound of "Touch of Evil" comes closer, but actually you wouldn’t think of Mancini if you hadn’t been told. Sato’s effect has lots of drums, mixes traditional Japanese flutes and other instruments with American big band noises, and feels jaunty and jangling throughout, discreetly off, as if half the band was playing in the wrong key. It’s distracting at first, then you realise it’s not decoration, it’s commentary. It’s a companion to "Sanjuro", the sound of his mind, discordant and undefeated and unserious, even when he’s grubby and silent and apparently solemn.</blockquote> ==Release== "Yojimbo" was released in Japan on 25 April 1961.{{sfn|Galbraith IV|1996|p= ...
