
This 2011 Porsche 911 Turbo S was originally sold by Porsche of San Diego
in August 2010 and acquired by the current owner in 2014 in California.
The car is finished in silver over black leather and powered by a
twin-turbocharged 3.8L flat-six that drives all four wheels through a
seven-speed dual-clutch transaxle. Equipment includes the Sport Chrono
package, carbon ceramic brakes, bi-xenon headlights, ParkAssist,
climatized and power-adjustable front seats, a SportDesign steering wheel,
automatic climate control, and a Kenwood touchscreen head unit. This 997
Turbo indicates 15k miles and is being offered by the seller on behalf of
the current owner, a California wholesale dealer, and should the winning
bidder be a California private party the transaction will be processed
through a licensed retail dealership. The sale includes a clean Carfax
report and a clean California title.

15k-Mile 2011 Porsche 911 Turbo S

The car is finished in silver and features dynamic cornering bi-xenon
headlights, integrated fog lamps, a sunroof, rear parking sensors, a
power-operated rear spoiler, and dual exhaust outlets. Scuffing is noted
on the underside of the front valance.


Center-locking 19a*^3 RS Spyder wheels wear 235/35 and
305/30A N-specification Michelin Pilot Sport tires that show date codes
from 2012. Porsche Ceramic Composite brakes (PCCB) with yellow-painted
calipers were equipped as standard on Turbo S models. Scuffing is visible
on the right rear wheel.


The interior is upholstered in black full leather with matching carpets
that are protected by Porsche-branded floor mats. The Turbo S was equipped
with the Sport Chrono package with dash-mounted lap timer as standard, and
controls for the adjustable suspension and engine modes are located in the
center stack. Additional amenities include heated and ventilated
power-adjustable front seats, cruise control, automatic climate control,
and a Kenwood touchscreen head unit.


A SportDesign steering wheel with shift paddles frames a central
tachometer and a 225-mph speedometer along with gauges for oil
temperature, coolant temperature, fuel level, and oil pressure. 15k miles
are shown on the digital odometer.


The twin-turbocharged 3.8-liter flat-six is fitted with a carbon fiber air
box and was factory-rated at 523 horsepower with 516 lb-ft of torque. The
car achieved a 0-60 time of 2.7 seconds, and a maximum speed of 196 mph
when new. An oil and filter change has been performed in preparation for
the sale.


A seven-speed PDK dual-clutch transaxle was the sole transmission
available in the Turbo S, and drive is sent to all four wheels via a
variable all-wheel-drive system with an electromagnetically actuated
multi-plate clutch. Additional photos of the underside are provided in the
gallery.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history with two total owners
in California from new.

Filed under: 997, 997 turbo

