
This Pontiac Firebird Formula SLP Firehawk is #805 of 1,503 examples
produced for the 2002 model year and was sold new by Somerset Pontiac GMC
of Troy, Michigan. The car is finished in red over black leather and
powered by a 5.7-liter LS1 V8 paired with a six-speed manual transmission
and a limited-slip differential. Performance enhancements from SLP
Engineering include a cold air induction composite hood with heat
extractors, a stainless steel exhaust system, and suspension upgrades.
This Firehawk was acquired by the selling dealer from the original owner
in July 2020 and is now offered with a car cover, a window sticker, a
birth certificate, original sales documentation, handwritten notes,
manufacturer's literature, a clean Carfax report, and a clean Michigan
title.

16k-Mile 2002 Pontiac Firebird Formula SLP Firehawk 6-Speed

The car is finished in Bright Red and features a composite hood with cold
air induction scoops and heat extractors along with fog lamps, Firehawk
graphics, removable glass T-top panels, and a rear wing. Detailed photos
of the paintwork and trim can be viewed in the gallery below.


Firehawk-specific 17a*^3 aluminum wheels are wrapped in 275/40 Firestone
Firehawk tires at all four corners. The car is equipped with the optional
Bilstein Ultra Performance suspension package from SLP Engineering.


The cabin is upholstered in Ebony leather with matching plastics and
carpets, the latter of which are protracted by Firehawk-branded floor mats
up front. Amenities include front bucket seats with six-way power
adjustment for the driver, remote keyless entry, air conditioning, a
short-throw shifter, and a factory Monsoon sound system. The factory
shifter assembly is included in the sale.


Red backlit instrumentation consists of a 155-mph speedometer and a
tachometer along with gauges for coolant temperature, oil pressure,
battery, and fuel level. The odometer indicates 16k miles.


Tuned by SLP Engineering as part of the Firehawk package, the 5.7-liter
LS1 V8 was rated at 345 horsepower when new. Additional modifications
performed by SLP Engineering include a high-capacity radiator, a high-flow
mass air flow sensor, and a stainless-steel exhaust system. The selling
dealer performed an oil change in preparation for the sale. Signatures
from former SLP Engineering and marketing executives Jeff Yachnin and Reg
Harris can be seen at the base of the hood.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a BorgWarner T56 six-speed manual
transmission. Additional photos showing the suspension, chassis, and
driveline are presented in the gallery below.


The birth certificate from SLP Engineering shows the cara**s assembly
facility, completion date, production number, and the selling dealer along
with additional specifications and details including SLP-installed
options.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
history with a single owner in Michigan through the latest entry in
December 2019.

