
This 2012 Mercedes-Benz C63 AMG Black Series is finished in Diamond White
Metallic over black leather and Alcantara, and it is powered by a
6.2-liter V8 paired with a seven-speed automatic transmission and a
limited-slip differential. Black Series upgrades include flared fenders, a
revised hood and bumper covers, an adjustable suspension, and engine
upgrades, and modifications consist of Weistec exhaust components and an
ECU upgrade. Additional equipment includes the AMG Aerodynamic and
Exterior Carbon packages, as well as heated front seats, COMAND with
navigation, Keyless-Go, bi-xenon headlights with active corner
illumination, and a panoramic sunroof. The car was recently imported to
the US from Canada by the selling dealer, who added approximately 1k of
the 17k miles it now has. This C63 Black Series is now offered with
partial records, accessories, a Carfax report, and a clean Michigan title.

17k-Mile 2012 Mercedes-Benz C63 AMG Coupe Black Series

The car is finished in Diamond White Metallic (799U) and features a Black
Series-specific vented hood, DTM-style fender flares, and revised bumper
covers. The AMG Aerodynamics package added front bumper canards and a deck
lid mounted spoiler, and additional equipment includes carbon-fiber trim,
bi-xenon headlights with active curve illumination, and a panoramic
sunroof. The Carfax report lists damage occurring to the right front in
July 2013, which the selling dealer states reported in repair and
refinishing of the front bumper. A front plate bracket is mounted to the
tow hook receptacle, and aftermarket tint film has been applied to the
rear and side windows. AA walk-around video is provided by the seller.


Factory staggered-width 19'' wheels finished in black wearing Michelin
Pilot Sport tires measuring 255/35 up front and 285/30 out back, which are
mounted over red-finished calipers and cross drilled rotors at each
corner. The Black Series features a wider track front and rear, along with
stiffer springs, larger anti-roll bars, adjustable spring perches, and
two-way adjustable dampers.


The interior features seats upholstered in black Nappa leather with
Alcantara inserts and contrasting red stitching, along with matching door
panels and black carpets that are protected by AMG-logo floor mats.
High-gloss carbon-fiber trim accents the dashboard, center console, and
doors, and additional amenities include red seat belts, bucket rear seats,
automatic climate control, aluminum pedals, a COMAND navigation system,
and a premium sound system. A BlackVue camera system is mounted below the
rear-view mirror.


A flat-bottomed steering wheel with aluminum paddles shifters frames
instrumentation including a 320-km/h speedometer with a multi-function
display and an 8k-rpm tachometer, along with gauges for fuel level and
coolant temperature. The digital odometer indicates 17k miles,
approximately 1k of which were added by the selling dealer.


The 6.2-liter DOHC 32-valve V8 produced 510 horsepower and 457 lb-ft of
torque when new, which is sent to the rear wheels through a seven-speed
MCT automatic transmission and a limited-slip differential. Weistec
exhaust modifications including a center section and headers, which are
matched by a recalibrated ECU according to the selling dealer.


The August 2020 Carfax report indicates the aforementioned July 2013
damage report, as well as registration in Ontario Canada through July
2020. A video tour of the underbody is provided below.

