
This 1929 Gar Wood runabout is a dual-cockpit Baby Gar model that features
a 28' semi-planing mahogany hull. It was originally purchased at Obexer's
Boat Company by Edwin Letts Oliver, the first commodore of the Tahoe Power
Boat Club, which was later renamed the Tahoe Yacht Club. Oliver named the
vessel Hey There III and raced it until 1938, when it was acquired by
Henry J. Kaiser and renamedA Lemme Go First!A It later served as a fire
boat on Lake Tahoe before being discovered byA collector Alan Furth and
restored by a subsequent owner in the 1990s. The forward cockpit features
a port-side helm and is separated from the aft cockpit by the engine
compartment. A 678ci Scipps straight-six was installed in the early 2000s
and turns a single bronze propeller.A Lemme Go First! was donated in 2001
to the seller, the Tahoe Maritime Museum,A and scored over 90 points at
the 2010 Lake Tahoe Concours da**Elegance. This Gar Wood runabout is now
offered in Carson City, Nevada, with a clean California title in the
museum's name.

1929 Gar Wood 28' Baby Gar Runabout

This Baby Gar took place in its first regatta on July 21, 1929 when first
owner Edwin Letts Oliver entered it in a Gar Wood race at McKinney's
landing (now Chamber's Landing). The second owner, Henry J Kaiser, fitted
a 300 horsepower Scripps Model 302 V12 and raced the vessel in the 1939
Tahoe Power Boat Club regatta, in addition to other races through 1941.


The deep-V, semi-planing hull features seam and batten mahogany planking
over white oak framing. It measures 28' long and 7' 2'' wide and features
a polished cutwater, rub rails, and cleats. The foredeck, coverboards, and
quarterdeck are made of plywood with a 3/4'' mahogany overlay. The Baby
Gar model name is painted in gold on the sides, and the vessel's name,
Lemme Go First!, is painted in gold on the transom.


The forward cockpit features aA two-pane, hinged windscreen and two rows
of seating upholstered in plum-colored leather. The center seat in the
front row is removable for access to storage beneath. A single bilge pump
is located beneath the forward cockpit. The aft cockpit is equipped with
an additional bench seat that shows wear in its lower cushion.


A wooden steering wheel is located on the port side of the forward cockpit
and features levers for throttle and spark advance. A polished
forward/reverse shifter comes up through the floorboard. The instrument
cluster includes a Stewart magnetic-type tachometer, as well as a
temperature gauge, ammeter, and oil pressure gauge.


The Scripps Model 202 six-cylinder displacesA 678 cubic inches and was
acquired by the museum in 2002. The L-head engine produced 200 horsepower
when new and is equipped with a single Holly DD5 downdraft 2'' carburetor
and twin-spark ignition. The 12-volt electrical system requires two
batteries. The seller notes that the center cylinder block is missing a
water drain cock. The cast iron threads have corroded might require a
thread insert to install the A 1/4-20 drain cock. A Kidde marine fire
extinguisher is mounted in the engine compartment, and a single exhaust
exits out the transom. An engine-start video using starter fuel can be
watched here.


A stainless steel prop shaft turns a bronze three-blade Michigan DynaJet
propellor. The single rudder is a bronze teardrop design, and the leading
portion of the underside is made of plywood covered with green-painted
fiberglass. The boat was last in the water approximately 10 years ago for
the Lake Tahoe Concours da**Elegance. The rolling cradle seen in photos is
not included in the sale.


A report of marine survey by Admiralty Marine Services was commissioned in
2003 and can be viewed in the gallery below. The scoring sheets from the
2010 Lake Tahoe Concours da**Elegance are also attached in the gallery.

