
This 1936 Ford is a steel-bodied cabriolet that was modified during the
early 1990s and acquired by the seller approximately 18 years ago. The
exterior is finished in red with black stripes over a tan leather
interior, and features include a white soft top, a rear-mounted spare tire
carrier, and a rumble seat. Power is provided by a 350ci GM ZZ-4 crate
engine paired with a Turbo-Hydramatic three-speed automatic transmission,
and additional equipment consists of a Vintage Air A/C system, a
power-adjustable drivera**s seat, a stainless-steel exhaust system, and an
Alpine stereo. The radiator was replaced in June 2020, and an oil change
and lubrication service were completed earlier this year. This Ford
cabriolet is now being offered with a binder of service records and a
clean California title in the sellera**s name.

1936 Ford Cabriolet

The steel body was reportedly repainted red with black stripes on the hood
and fenders in the early 1990a**s. The seller states that the trunk floor
was replaced by a previous owner, while the headlight buckets and front
grill were refinished during current ownership. Features include a white
soft top, a rumble seat, and a rear-mounted spare tire carrier, as well as
chrome trim, side-view mirrors, and bumpers with red pinstripes. Noted
flaws include touched-up rock chips on the front fenders, cracked paint at
a corner of the rear decklid, thin paint on the driver-side fender, and
holes in both rear fenders from previously-mounted skirts.


Cream and red-painted steel wheels feature chrome trim rings and hubcaps
and are wrapped in wide whitewall tires. Stopping power is provided by
front discs with rear drums, and a replacement steering box was reportedly
installed in 2016. A full-size spare is found in the trunk.


The interior was refreshed in 2016 with tan leather seats from a Ford
Mustang and matching vinyl interior panels. Dynamat sound-deadening was
added to the floors, while bubble-type insulation was applied to the doors
and firewall. Additional features include a Vintage Air A/C system, Alpine
stereo with remote, a power-adjustable drivera**s seat, and a center
console with two cupholders. The electric windows are said to work slowly,
while the adjustable lumbar support on the drivera**s seat is inoperable.
Cushions for the rumble seat are included with the sale, though the
upholstery is non-matching.


The dashboard was reportedly repainted during current ownership, and a
matching banjo-style steering wheel is mounted to a replacement steering
column. Instrumentation includes a 120-mph speedometer and gauges for
voltage, fuel level, oil pressure, and water temperature. The five-digit
odometer shows just under 27k miles, though total mileage is unknown.


The 350ci GM ZZ-4 crate engine features a 16-gallon stainless-steel fuel
tank and back-up electric fuel pump, along with a stainless-steel exhaust
system, 100-amp Powermaster alternator, Walker radiator, and Chassis
Engineering mounts. Maintenance since January 2020 includes changes of the
oil and coolant, as well as the installation of a replacement fuel filter.
A cold start video can be seen here.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a Turbo-Hydramatic three-speed
automatic transmission and a GM ten-bolt rear differential with 3.08:1
gears. The frame has been painted with acrylic enamel and features molded
chassis brackets and cross-members. The seller states that the
transmission housing bushing was replaced in January 2020. Additional
underbody images can be seen in the gallery below.

