
This 1954 Chevrolet Corvette was built in St. Louis, Missouri, and is
finished in Sportsman Red with a tan convertible top over a red interior.
The car was reportedly refurbished by Corvette Mike in Anaheim,
California, in the early 2000s and is powered by a 235ci Blue Flame
inline-six paired with a two-speed Powerglide automatic transmission.
Equipment includes a push-button AM radio, aftermarket lap belts, 15''
whitewall tires, triple Carter side-draft carburetors, and "beehive" air
cleaners. This second-year Corvette is now offered by the seller on behalf
of a dealer with side curtains and transferable Connecticut registration.

1954 Chevrolet Corvette

The fiberglass body was reportedly refinished in Sportsman Red as part of
the refurbishment performed by Corvette Mike and features a tan
convertible top, wire mesh headlight guards, and dual exhaust tips exiting
through the rear bodywork between the three-piece rear bumper. The seller
notes that the wrap-around windshield is a replacement and that the
factory straps to hold the convertible top in its lowered position are
missing. A paint chip can be seen on the lower edge of the left-rear
quarter panel in the photo gallery.


15'' steel wheels wear replacement chrome hubcaps and Goodyear whitewall
tires. Braking is provided by four-wheel drums, and the car rides on
independent front suspension with coil springs as well as a live axle with
leaf springs out back.


The interior is trimmed in Sportsman Red vinyl with matching carpets and
door panels, white accents on the dash and doors, and chrome trim.
Amenities include a push-button AM radio, matching red floor mats, and
aftermarket red lap belts.


Factory instrumentation consists of a 140-mph speedometer and a
center-mounted tachometer flanked by gauges for fuel level, coolant
temperature, battery voltage, and oil pressure. The five-digit odometer
shows 21k miles, and true mileage is unknown.


The 235ci Blue Flame inline-six features three Carter side-draft
carburetors. Factory-style "beehive" air cleaners are fitted, and the
seller notes that the fuel tank sending unit was replaced in June 2020.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a Powerglide two-speed automatic
transmission. Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery, and
the seller has provided an overview video below.

