
This Porsche 356 Speedster replica was built by Vintage Speedsters of
Hawaiian Gardens, California in 2015, and features a fiberglass body
finished in ivory over a camel interior. Power is from a 1,915cc
Volkswagen flat-four paired with a Freeway Flyer four-speed manual
transaxle, and the car features a number of options including a luggage
rack, front disc brakes, front and rear sway bars, an auxiliary oil
cooler, interior and trunk carpeting, a Bluetooth audio system, and more.
The seller acquired the car in 2017, and has since had the brakes and
carburetors serviced as well as replacing the distributor and fitting an
aftermarket steering wheel. Gaskets were replaced along with a valve
adjustment and oil change in preparation for sale. This Speedster replica
is offered with a soft top, side curtains, two tonneau covers, a
Porsche-branded nose protector, build and service records, and a
Washington State title listing it as a 1962 VW Beetle kit vehicle in the
seller's name.

1957 Porsche 356 Speedster Replica by Vintage Speedsters

The fiberglass body is styled after that of a 1957 Porsche 356 Speedster
and fixed to a steel frame with a shortened and modified Volkswagen Beetle
floor pan. The car is finished in Ivory and features painted bumpers with
chrome overriders. Other details include Mobil Pegasus decals and Reutter
shields on the front fenders, gold Porsche-style lettering, headlamp cover
grates, fog lamps, European-style teardrop taillamps, chromed exterior
hardware, dual fender mirrors, and a luggage rack with a leather strap.


A removable tan soft top and Troy Sloan CruZin side windows are included
in the sale, as are the quarter and full tonneau covers shown in the
gallery below. Body-colored 15'' steel wheels wear chrome hubcaps with
Porsche crests and Nankang radial tires with 2015 date codes. Braking is
from front discs and rear drums, and the front hoses have been replaced
under current ownership along with the backing plates, shoes, wheel
cylinders, and hard line in the rear.


The cockpit is trimmed with camel upholstery over the dash pad, doors, and
low-backed seats, the latter of which feature lap restraints. Floors and
kick panels are lined with gray carpeting and protected by black Coco
mats, and drilled pedal covers have been fitted. The donor Volkswagen
chassis number can be viewed beneath a carpeted access flap on the center
tunnel.


A flower vase and several medallions adorn the dash, beneath which is
mounted a period-style RetroSound stereo with Bluetooth, a microphone, and
an auxiliary power socket. A Nardi-style replica steering wheel frames
green-lettered gauges including an analog clock, a tachometer, and a km/h
speedometer. The five-digit odometer shows 5k kilometers (~3k miles), of
which 2,500 kilometers have been driven by the seller.


The trunk is lined with carpet and houses the battery, the fuel tank, and
a covered spare wheel finished in silver.


The 1.915cc Volkswagen flat-four features dual carburetors and an optional
auxiliary oil cooler. Period-style German decals can be seen throughout
the engine bay. The seller states that the carburetors have been serviced
and the distributor replaced under his ownership. The valve cover and
exhaust manifold gaskets were changed in preparation for the sale along
with adjustment of the valves, carburetors, and ignition timing. An oil
change and spark plug cleaning were also carried out.


The Freeway Flyer four-speed manual transaxle features a 3.88:1 final
drive ratio. Dual exhaust tips exit beneath the rear bumper.


Build paperwork from Vintage Speedster is pictured above, and several
service records and spec sheets from the seller are included in the
gallery. A walk-around and driving video is provided below.

