
This 1959 Alfa Romeo Giulietta Spider is a short-wheelbase example that
was acquired by the seller out of Vancouver, British Columbia
approximately 16 years ago and has since been refurbished and modified. A
2.0-liter inline-four and a five-speed manual transmission from a later
model Alfa Romeo Spider were installed, along with four-wheel disc brakes
and a limited-slip differential. Cosmetic refurbishment in the last two
years included a repaint in red, a replacement soft top, and reupholstery
of the black leather interior, while additional equipment includes 15''
steel wheels, dual Weber carburetors, Centerline Alfa electronic ignition,
Megacycle camshafts, and more. This Giulietta Spider is now offered with
spare parts and a clean California title listing the car as a 1962 model.

1959 Alfa Romeo Giulietta Spider

The body was repainted in red in 2018, and imperfections are now said to
include rough spots on the hood, areas of cracking paint, and unpainted
rust repair in the front lower corner of the passenger side door.
Replacement stainless steel bumpers and side moldings were fitted
following the paintwork, along with a replacement windshield gasket. The
rocker panels are said to have been previously replaced and reinforced
with Wolf Steel components, and the seller notes evidence of body filler
and prior repairs around the nose panel.


Powder-coated 15'' wheels from a Giulia Ti wear Falken tires. Centerline
Alfa springs are equipped at all four corners, while Koni shocks and a
Centerline Alfa sway bar have been added up front. Braking is handled by
four-wheel discs, along with a Tilton master cylinder with a remote fluid
reservoir and proportioning valve. The black soft top is said to have been
replaced in 2019 and is shown in its raised position in the image gallery
below. The seller notes that the top does not fit tightly to the
windshield frame and states that the reverse lights are disconnected.


The seats have been re-upholstered in black leather with red piping, and
the cabin features matching door panels and red carpets protected by
branded floor mats. A battery cut-off switch and brake proportioning valve
have been added near the rear bulkhead, and a fire extinguisher is mounted
between the seats.


A custom aluminum dashboard houses instrumentation including a 140-mph
speedometer, a tachometer with a 5,700-rpm redline, a wide-band O2 gauge,
and a five-digit odometer showing just over 99k miles. Approximately 20k
miles have been added by the seller, who notes that the gauge lights are
dim and the windshield washer reservoir and pump have been removed. True
mileage is unknown.


The 2.0-liter Twin Cam inline-four, five-speed manual transmission, and
limited-slip rear differential were reportedly sourced from a later model
Alfa Romeo Spider and were installed approximately 10k miles ago with
Centerline Alfa engine mounts and 1'' aluminum crossmember spacers. The
engine is said to have been rebuilt approximately a decade ago with a
lightened crankshaft, a ported cylinder head, forged pistons, and
Megacycle camshafts. The hydraulic clutch setup from the donor car has
been retained using cylinders from a GTV6, and the seller states that 10k
miles have been added since the rebuild. Additional modifications are said
to include the following:

* Twin Weber DCOE 45 carburetors
* K&N air filter
* Centerline Alfa 4-2-1 headers
* Centerline Alfa electronic ignition system
* Wideband O2 sensor
* Remote oil filter


The seller states that an oil change and valve adjustment were performed
approximately 40 miles ago, and the cold-start system has been disabled.
Additional photos of the underside are provided in the image gallery
below.

