
This 1960 Austin-Healey 3000 is a left-hand-drive Mk I BN7 two-seater that
was acquired by its current owner from Koz's Classics of Ottawa Lake,
Michigan in 2010, who then performed a multi-year refurbishment completed
in 2014. The work is said to have included a repaint in red and black, new
upholstery, rebuilds of the 2,912cc straight-six and four-speed manual
transmission with overdrive, and more. Features consist of a black soft
top and side curtains as well as a heater, while modifications include
PerTronix ignition, a quick-fill petrol cap, painted Dayton wire wheels,
and a 12V Optimum Redtop battery. This BN7 is offered by the seller on
behalf of its current owner in Michigan with refurbishment photos, a
tonneau cover, and a clean Ohio title in the owner's name.

1960 Austin-Healey 3000 Mk I BN7

Approximately 2,800 examples of the Mk I BN7 were built from 1959 to 1961,
and this car was previously finished in red. Bodywork and a bare-metal
repaint in black over red coves was carried out for the owner by the
seller in the 2010s. A new black soft top was installed during the
refurbishment, along with side curtains with sliding Perspex windows that
can be seen in the gallery. A matching tonneau cover is included in the
sale.


Brightwork includes front and rear bumpers with overriders as well as a
quick-fill petrol cap. Painted 72-spoke Dayton wire wheels feature chrome
knock-off nuts and are mounted with Sonar S-780 tires. A spare wheel is
housed in the trunk.


New upholstery was fitted during the refurbishment along with a new wiring
harness and a rebuild of the Smiths instrumentation. The red interior
features bucket seats with contrast piping, while black floor mats match
the carpets and are embroidered with the Austin-Healey logo. A period
Smiths heater is mounted under the dash. A banjo-spoke steering wheel
frames a tachometer and a 120-mph speedometer. Just over 24k miles are
shown on the five-digit odometer, 2k of which have been added under
current ownership. Total mileage is unknown.


The 2,912cc C-Series straight-six features dual SU carburetors and was
rated at 124 horsepower with 167 lb-ft of torque when new. The engine was
reportedly rebuilt during the refurbishment, and a PerTronix ignition and
12V Optima Redtop battery is fitted.


Power is sent to the rear wheels via a rebuilt four-speed manual
transmission with overdrive. Additional underside photos are provided
below.


Photos taken before and during the refurbishment can be seen in the
gallery. Driving videos are provided below, with additional footage
available on the seller's Vimeo channel.

