
This 1962 Triumph TR3B is powered by a 2,138cc inline-four paired with a
four-speed manual transmission. The seller reportedly purchased it in 2006
from the founder of the Red River Triumph Club in Texas, who had owned the
car since 1983. The car was refinished in red in 2013, and other work
performed during current ownership has included reupholstering the black
interior as well as replacing the black soft top and the clutch and
overhauling the suspension and the brakes. Modifications include a Triumph
Spitfirea**sourced steering rack, a Moto-Lita steering wheel, an aluminum
radiator, and an anti-sway bar. This TR3B is now offered by the seller on
behalf of their spouse with a white tonneau cover, a monogrammed car
cover, spare parts, side curtains, and a clean Texas title in the owner's
name.

1962 Triumph TR3B

The car reportedly received a repaint in red in 2010 following bodywork to
smoothen door dings, as the seller reports that the factory paint was
oxidized. It was repainted again in 2013 after a traffic collision in
which the passenger side front and rear quarter panels were damaged.
Additional work performed during current ownership is said to have
included replacement of the black vinyl top, the grille, and chrome trim.
LiteZupp LED headlights, turn signals, and brake lights have been
installed, and the white tonneau cover exhibits a tear that is shown in
the photo gallery below. The seller notes a 4 *8'' area of corrosion on
the front driver-side quarter panel and a set of holes just below the
front grille, both of which are also depicted in the gallery, as are the
convertible top and side curtains.


Powdercoated 15'' steel wheels with chrome hubcaps and trim rings are
wrapped in 165-series radial tires. The suspension has been modified with
rebuilt rear shocks, rack-and-pinion steering sourced from a Triumph
Spitfire, and an added anti-sway bar. Front brake calipers have been
replaced, and braided steel brake lines have been installed by the seller.


The interior features reupholstered black seats with white piping over
black carpeting that is said to have been replaced in 2010.


A black-rimmed Moto-Lita steering wheel fronts instrumentation including a
120-mph speedometer, a 6k-rpm tachometer, and center-mounted auxiliary
gauges. The seller states that the speedometer cable was recently
replaced. The five-digit odometer displays just under 89k miles,
approximately 2k of which have been added during current ownership.


The 2,138cc inline-four reportedly exhibits an oil leak from the rear main
seal, and the seller notes that an uninstalled replacement rear seal is
included in the sale. The seller has installed an aluminum radiator, a
spin-on oil filter, and replacement coolant hoses.


Power is sent to the rear wheels via a synchromesh four-speed manual
gearbox, and the seller indicates that the clutch has been replaced.
Additional photos of the underbody are provided in the gallery.

