
This 1965 Volkswagen Beetle is a modified example that was refurbished by
its previous owner in 2017 and acquired by the seller shortly after. The
car is finished in silver over a black vinyl interior, and power is
provided by a 1,776cc flat-four mated to a four-speed manual transaxle.
Modifications include a narrowed front beam, KYB shocks, billet tie rod
ends, EMPI front and rear disc brakes, polished 15'' wheels, a roof rack,
and more as detailed below. This Beetle is now offered with a clean
California title in the seller's name.

1965 Volkswagen Beetle

The body was repainted a Mercedes-Benz shade of metallic silver by its
previous owner in 2017. Additional work is said to have included
installing replacement bumpers with overriders, headlight and taillight
assemblies, turn signals, running boards, vent windows, door handles,
chrome trim, and rubber gaskets. An aftermarket roof rack with wood slats
has also been added, and a black California license plate is mounted out
back. Photos of the paintwork, trim, and glass are shown up close in the
gallery below.


Aftermarket 15'' chrome wheels are wrapped in Firestone F-560 tires up
front and Mastercraft MC-440 tires out back. The suspension has been
modified with a 4'' narrowed front beam with shock towers, along with KYB
shocks, adjustable rear lowering plates, and billet tie rod ends. Braking
is handled by EMPI four-wheel discs with braided lines and an EMPI master
cylinder.


The interior features reupholstered low-back front seats and a rear bench
trimmed in black vinyl with matching carpets. The dash and interior metal
panels are also finished in metallic silver, and a replacement headliner
was added. Equipment includes an EMPI shifter, a wicker lower parcel
shelf, an ash tray and glove box, and a Sapphire III radio.


A replacement two-spoke steering wheel fronts a 90-mph speedometer with a
five-digit odometer that shows just under 61k miles, approximately 1k of
which have been added by the seller. True mileage is unknown.


The dual port 1,776cc features a single carburetor and was rebuilt during
the refurbishment in 2017. Power is transferred to the rear wheels through
a replacement four-speed manual transaxle. The clutch and throttle cables
were also replaced, and the seller states that an oil change was performed
in 2019.


A handful of photos from the refurbishment are available in the gallery.

