
This 1965 International Harvester Scout 80 was delivered new to
Fayetteville International Sales in Fayetteville, North Carolina and is
said to have been initially used by the US Air Force. Powered by a 152ci
Comanche inline-four paired with a three-speed manual transmission, it was
acquired by the seller in 2016 while it was partway through a
refurbishment. Completion of the project included renewing the fuel
system, rebuilding the carburetor, replacing the engine seals, and also
installing a 2.5a*^3 suspension lift accompanied by new shocks and tires.
This Scout is now offered with a black convertible top, a removable
hardtop, a half-cab top, service records dating back to 2003, a photocopy
of the line-setting ticket, manufacturera**s literature, manuals, a
collection of spare parts, an extra set of wheels and tires, and a clean
Minnesota title in the sellera**s name.

1965 International Harvester Scout 80

The Scout 80 was the first iteration of the model and debuted for 1961.
This final-year example was refinished in its current yellow more than 15
years ago by the previous owner according to the seller, who notes that
the frame was refinished separately. Features include a fold-down
windshield, tube bumpers, and dual fuel fillers. The seller notes
scratches and fading in portions of the finish as well as corrosion at the
top of a windshield support post. Uninstalled items accompanying the
vehicle include the driver's window and some trim pieces.


The truck features a black folding soft top, and an unrestored white
removable hardtop and a white half-cab top are included in the sale and
shown in the gallery. A 2.5a*^3 Rough Country lift kit was installed by
the seller, as were 15a*^3 ATX 188 wheels and 31A*10.5a*^3 BFGoodrich KO2
All-Terrain tires. A spare set of body-color wagon wheels mounted with
Bridgestone tires is included in the sale.


The interior is outfitted with power-operated bucket seats sourced from a
Buick and a rear cargo area clad in body-color diamond plating. A Kenwood
CD player is linked to a pair of boxed speakers, and Rhino bedlining has
been applied to the footwells.


Instrumentation consists of an 80-mph speedometer and gauges for coolant
temperature and fuel level. Per the seller, the handbrake is disconnected
and the speedometer, fuel gauge, warning lights, and radio are
inoperative. The working five-digit odometer shows 72k miles,
approximately 700 of which were added by the seller.


The 152ci Comanche inline-four was rated at 93 horsepower and 135 lb-ft of
torque when new and is paired with a three-speed Borg-Warner T90 manual
transmission. Work by the seller has included oil changes as well as
replacement of the gas tank and fuel sending units and a carburetor
rebuild. The truck was last serviced with replacement of the engine seals
in 2018.


The seller notes that the front driveshaft is uninstalled. Additional
photos provided in the gallery highlight the condition of the chassis,
floors, and suspension components. The seller notes corrosion on the front
tie rod.


The line-setting ticket copy is pictured above and lists the factory
equipment and options. The included chassis inspection card is displayed
in the gallery.


Additional materials accompanying the truck include a shop manual, period
literature, parts invoices, and a collection of spare parts.

