
This 1967 Chevrolet Corvette convertible was built on June 9, 1967 and
originally delivered to Richard Chevrolet of Bellaire, Ohio. It reportedly
spent much of its life in New York before being acquired by the seller in
Illinois earlier this year. The body is finished in Sunfire Yellow and
features a black hood stripe along with a white soft top over a black
interior. Power is provided by a numbers-matching 427ci L71 Tri-Power V8
paired with a four-speed manual transmission, and features include an
AM/FM radio, side-exit exhaust pipes, and chrome bumperettes. The
carburetors and brake calipers are said to have been recently rebuilt, and
new spark plugs were also installed. This C2 Corvette is now being offered
with an ownera**s manual, NCRS Shipping Data Report, and a clean Illinois
title in the sellera**s name.

1967 Chevrolet Corvette Convertible L71 427/435 4-Speed

The exterior is believed to have been repainted in Sunfire Yellow (984)
some time ago and features a black hood stripe along with a white soft
top, side-exit exhaust pipes, and chrome bumperettes. A paint-matched
hardtop is included in the sale and can be seen in the gallery below.


The car rides on aftermarket Western turbine-style wheels, and braking is
handled by discs at all four corners. The seller reports that the brake
calipers were recently rebuilt while a rear leaf spring was replaced
during prior ownership. Redline tires have been fitted since several of
the photos were taken.


The bucket seats are trimmed in black vinyl with a matching dashboard,
door panels, and carpets. The center stack houses a vertically-mounted
AM/FM radio along with an analog clock.


A simulated wood steering wheel frames a 160-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm
tachometer, and auxiliary gauges for amperage, water temperature, oil
pressure, and fuel level. The five-digit odometer shows just over 80k
miles, approximately 1k of which have been added by the seller. Total
mileage is unknown.


Power comes from a 427ci L71 V8, and work performed during current
ownership is said to have included rebuilding all three carburetors,
replacing the spark plugs, and performing a valve adjustment and
compression test.


Engine block stamping 7120495 matches the last six digits on the chassis
identification plate shown in the gallery below. The "JE" suffix indicates
a 427ci/435-horsepower engine with a manual transmission. Additional parts
numbers can be seen in the gallery.


The rear wheels are driven through a Muncie four-speed manual
transmission. Additional underbody images are available in the gallery
below.


The NCRS Shipping Data Report lists a production date of June 9, 1967 and
initial delivery to Richard Chevrolet of Bellaire, Ohio.

Filed under: c2

