
This 1969 Pontiac LeMans convertible is finished in metallic blue over a
parchment vinyl interior and is powered by a 350ci V8 paired with a
three-speed automatic transmission. Equipment includes a power-operated
white soft top, air conditioning, power-assisted steering and brakes, 15''
American Racing wheels, and an aftermarket exhaust. The seller has
reportedly changed engine oil, coolant, tires, and radiator hoses since
acquiring the car in early 2020. This LeMans convertible is now offered
with a soft top boot, PHS Historic Services documentation, and a clean
California title in the seller's name.

1969 Pontiac LeMans Convertible

Pontiac built 5,676 LeMans convertibles for the 1969 model year, and this
example was repainted metallic blue during prior ownership. Equipment
includes chrome bumpers and trim as well as a power-operated white soft
top with a glass rear window. A rust hole on the right-front fender has
reportedly been treated with inhibitor, and bubbling is present on the
lower portion of left front fender. Faded paint and chips are shown
up-close in the image gallery below.


Polished 15'' American Racing wheels wear BFGoodrich Radial T/A tires that
the seller states were recently mounted. The car is equipped with
power-assisted brakes and steering. A soft-top boot is included in the
sale.


The interior is trimmed in parchment vinyl with charcoal carpets, black
rubber floor mats, and woodgrain accents on the dash. Equipment includes
lap belts, air conditioning, power windows and locks, and a radio. A crack
on the dash pad has been patched.


The aftermarket three-spoke steering wheel fronts a 120-mph speedometer
and an 8k-rpm tachometer. The five-digit odometer shows just under 84k
miles, 1,200 of which were added by the seller. Total mileage is unknown.


The 350ci V8 is equipped with a two-barrel carburetor and sends power to
the rear wheels through a three-speed Turbo-Hydramatic automatic
transmission. Maintenance performed by the seller reportedly included new
cooling hoses as well as changes of the engine oil and coolant.


The Fisher body plate decodes as follows:

* ST 69-23767 - 1969 LeMans convertible
* TR 267 - Parchment vinyl interior
* PNT 53 - Warwick Blue exterior
* 01A - First week of January production


An aftermarket exhaust is fitted. Additional underside images can be
viewed in the gallery.


The car is supplied with a reproduction build sheet and car order form
provided by PHS Automotive Services. A driving video is shown below.

