
This 1970 Chevrolet Camaro SS was manufactured in Van Nuys, California,
and was purchased in 2019 by the seller, who states that the car was
refurbished three years prior. It is finished in Classic Copper with black
stripes over black and is powered by a 350ci V8 paired with an automatic
transmission. Equipment includes front and rear spoilers, polished wheels,
a lockable center console, an aftermarket Panasonic CD stereo, and more.
This Camaro SS is now offered with a build sheet and a clean California
title in the seller's name.

1970 Chevrolet Camaro SS

The body is finished in Classic Copper (67) and features two black rally
stripes. Equipment includes front and rear spoilers, side mirrors, quad
taillights, chrome bumpers, and dual exhaust outlets.


Five-spoke polished wheels with SS center caps are fitted with BFGoodrich
Radial T/A white letter tires at each corner.


The cabin features seats upholstered in black with a matching dash, door
panels, center console, and carpet. Interior equipment includes a lockable
center console, manual wind-up windows, seatbelts for four passengers, and
an aftermarket Panasonic CD stereo.


The two-spoke steering wheel fronts a 150-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm
tachometer, a clock, and gauges for coolant temperature and fuel level.
The five-digit odometer shows 86k miles, approximately 500 of which were
added by the seller. Total mileage is unknown.


Decoding the Fisher body tag reveals the following information:

* ST70A a** 1970 model year
* 12487A a** Camaro Sport Coupe
* BL a** Van Nuys, California, assembly
* TR 711 a** Black vinyl interior
* PNT 67 67 a** Classic Copper exterior
* 06B a** Produced in the second week of June


The 350ci V8 sends power to the rear wheels through an automatic
transmission. The engine is equipped with Edelbrock valve covers and is
topped with an Edelbrock air cleaner. Casting numbers are shown
photographed in the gallery below.


Additional underside photos are also viewable in the gallery. Start-up,
walk-around, and driving footage is provided below.

