
This 1970 Volvo 1800E is reported to have spent approximately 25 years in
California prior to its acquisition by the seller in 2016. The car has
been repainted in black over a red vinyl interior, and power comes from a
fuel-injected 2.3-liter inline-four paired with a four-speed manual
transmission with overdrive. Additional features include power-assisted
steering, a Volvo-branded RetroSound radio, LED tail lights, four-wheel
disc brakes, and aftermarket wheels. Service in early 2020 included the
installation of an electric radiator fan and replacement hoses, along with
an overhaul of the brakes and an oil change. This 1800E is now being
offered with service records from current ownership, a binder of factory
literature, spare parts, and a clean Pennsylvania title in the sellera**s
name.

1970 Volvo 1800E

Originally finished in white, the car received a repaint in black during
previous ownership. The chrome side trim has been wrapped in black vinyl,
and features include chrome front and rear impact bumpers, bullet-style
side view mirrors, and LED tail lights. The seller notes that the front
fog lamps are disconnected.


Silver-painted 16a** Image wheels feature faux knock-off spinners and are
wrapped in Bridgestone Potenza tires sized 205/55. Power-assisted steering
has been retrofitted, and the suspension has reportedly been modified with
Progressive springs and Bilstein shock absorbers. A replacement sway bar
drop link and ball joints were also installed during previous ownership.
Stopping power is provided by four-wheel disc brakes that are said to have
been serviced and fitted with replacement rear calipers in 2020.


The cabin features red vinyl seats and door panels sourced from a Volvo
1800ES, and the floors are lined with replacement red carpets covered by
Coco mats. A RetroSound radio with iPod connectivity is wired to a
trunk-mounted amplifier and speakers located behind the rear seat.


A wood-rimmed NRG steering wheel fronts a woodgrain-accented black
dashboard that houses a suite of Smiths instrumentation including a
120-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm tachometer, and gauges for oil temperature
and water temperature. Auxiliary gauges for fuel level and oil pressure
are mounted above the center console. The six-digit mechanical odometer
shows just over 177k miles, approximately 1,500 of which have been added
by the seller, who reports that the analog clock is inoperable and the
speedometer reading is erratic.


The fuel-injected inline-four was reportedly rebuilt and bored to
2.3-liters under previous ownership. Additional work performed is said to
include the installation of a replacement alternator, camshaft, pushrods,
solid lifters, and double valve springs. The four-speed manual
transmission features electronic overdrive and is also said to have been
overhauled by the previous owner. Additional modifications include
electronic ignition, a lightweight flywheel, and a three-core radiator
with an electric fan. Sound-deadening material has been added to the
underside of the hood.


Service records from current ownership and a binder of factory literature
are included with the sale.

