
This 1972 Chevrolet C10 pickup is finished in blue with a white roof over
a blue interior and powered by 350ci V8 paired with a three-speed
automatic transmission. A refurbishment completed approximately 15 years
ago included a repaint, installation of an oak bed floor with stainless
steel runners, and an interior refresh. The truck has been lowered, and
additional modifications consist of Super Cheyenne trim, 18'' Cragar
wheels, a bed cover, and a glove compartment-mounted Pioneer Bluetooth
stereo. This C10 pickup was acquired by the seller in 2017 and is now
offered with body-color 15'' Rallye wheels, an owner's manual, service
records and parts receipts, and a clean Colorado title in the seller's
name.

1972 Chevrolet C10 Pickup

The truck was refinished approximately 15 years ago in blue with a white
cab roof, at which point Super Cheyenne trim was also added. Additional
features include chrome bumpers, side mirrors, dual-exit exhaust outlets,
and trim with faux woodgrain inserts. Paint chips and scratches on
multiple panels are visible in photos available in the gallery below.


The bed floor is lined with oak and accented with polished stainless steel
runners. A black tonneau cover with a metal frame and gas struts have also
been fitted, and the intermediate wiring harness for the bed was recently
replaced.


Chrome 18'' Cragar wheels are mounted with 235/50 and 255/55 Toyo Versado
CUV tires. The suspension has been modified with dropped front spindles
and lowering blocks in the rear.A Braking is handled by discs up front and
drums out back. The steering column and the brake booster were overhauled
during current ownership.


The bench seat is upholstered in blue vinyl with houndstooth inserts and
the matching low-pile carpeting is protected by Chevrolet-branded rubber
floor mats. Amenities include lap belts, roll-down side windows, air
conditioning, a Delco AM/FM radio, and a Pioneer Bluetooth stereo that is
mounted in the glove compartment. A service parts identification sticker
is affixed to the inside of the glove compartment door.


A wood-rimmed steering wheel sits ahead of a body-color steel dashboard
with wood veneer accents. Instrumentation consists of a tachometer and a
100-mph speedometer along with auxiliary gauges with green dials and white
lettering. The five-digit odometer shows 6k miles, of which approximately
2k have been added by the seller. Total mileage is unknown.


The 350ci V8 is finished in orange and its four-barrel carburetor is
topped with a factory air-cleaner assembly. The carburetor was rebuilt and
the radiator was replaced during current ownership. New spark plugs were
installed and an oil change was performed in February 2020.


Power is transferred to the rear wheels through a three-speed TH350
automatic transmission. Additional photos of the underside are presented
in the gallery below.


The date stamp on the engine block decodes to reveal a production date of
May 17, 1972.

