
This 1973 Dodge Charger hardtop was acquired by the seller's brother in
2013, and was reportedly used as a prop car in the television show Burn
Notice. It is finished in black over white vinyl and powered by a 318ci V8
paired with a three-speed automatic transmission. Equipment includes 14''
Magnum 500-style wheels, dual exhaust, air conditioning, and a Midland
eight-track stereo. Recent service is said to include a tune-up and an oil
service. This Charger hardtop is now offered on behalf of the seller's
brother with a Florida plate used in the television show and a clean
Florida title.

1973 Dodge Charger Hardtop

The exterior is finished in black and features a hood scoop, chrome
bumpers, and an integrated rear decklid spoiler. The window seals were
removed during filming, and evidence of sealant applied around the windows
is visible. Exterior flaws are shown in the image gallery below, including
missing and cracked paint on the rear decklid and evidence of bodywork on
the right-rear quarter panel and right-front fender. A license plate
reportedly used in the television show is included in the sale.


Magnum 500-style 14a*^3 wheels are wrapped in 225/70 BFGoodrich Radial T/A
tires.


The interior is trimmed in white vinyl with matching door panels and black
carpets. Appointments include front bucket seats, air conditioning, and a
Midland eight-track stereo. The right-front seat belt is missing, and the
steering column was painted white and has flaking paint.


A three-spoke steering wheel fronts instrumentation that includes a
horizontal 120-mph speedometer along with gauges for coolant temperature
and fuel level. The five-digit odometer shows 68k miles, with total
mileage unknown.


The 318ci V8 was reportedly rebuilt during prior ownership, and power is
sent to the rear wheels through a three-speed automatic transmission.
According to the seller, a tune-up and fluid change were performed
approximately six months ago.


Additional underside images can be viewed in the gallery. Driving videos
are provided below.

