
This 1974 BMW 2002 Turbo is one of 1,672 built, and was delivered new in
Switzerland by BMW importer MOTAG before being imported to California in
the 1980s. The car moved to Portland, Oregon in 2007, where it was
acquired by the selling dealer in 2016 before subsequently being relocated
to Arizona. The body is finished in Chamonix with factory wheel flares,
Motorsport striping, and Turbo decals, and the interior is upholstered in
black vinyl. Power is from a numbers-matching turbocharged and
fuel-injected 2.0L inline-four backed by a Getrag close-ratio five-speed
manual transmission and a limited-slip differential. This 2002 Turbo is
offered with tool and first aid kits, partial service records, owner's
books, a binder of related literature, a BMW Classic certificate, and a
clean Arizona title.

1974 BMW 2002 Turbo 5-Speed

The car is finished in its original shade of Chamonix and features factory
Turbo trim including fiberglass wheel arch extensions and aA trunk lid
spoiler. A fiberglass air dam with tri-color stripes and a reversed
"turbo" decal replaces the front bumper. The selling dealer states that
the hood has been repainted and blended into the forward sections of the
fenders. A chart of paint-depth readings can be viewed in the gallery
below.


Steel wheels are mounted with 185/75-13 Pirelli tires. The front disc and
rear drum brakes were upgraded from the factory to compensate for the
higher output of the Turbo, and sway bars were fitted at both ends. The
car is said to have been featured in a BMW display at LeMay - America's
Car Museum in Tacoma, Washington.


The cabin features bolstered Rentrop sport seats and a rear bench trimmed
in black vinyl, with checker-pattern floor mats protecting black carpets.
Shoulder restrains are equipped for the front seat occupants.


A three-spoke steering wheel frames a red instrument surround containing a
VDO tachometer and 240-kmh speedometer. Approximately 3k of the 74k
kilometers (~46k miles) indicated on the five-digit odometer were added
under current ownership. Two pods on the dash house a VDO clock and boost
gauge as well as oil pressure and temperature readouts. The five-speed
gearbox features a dogleg first gear position at the lower left.


The numbers-matching 2.0-liter M10 inline-four features Kugelfischer
mechanical fuel injection and was fitted with 6.9:1 compression pistons, a
KKK turbocharger, and an auxiliary oil cooler from the factory. Output was
quoted at 170 horsepower with 173 lb-ft of torque when new, enough to
propel the ~2,400-pound vehicle from 0-60mph in 7.0 seconds in
contemporary testing. An oil change was performed in preparation for the
sale.


Power is routed to the rear wheels through a limited-slip differential.
The car wasA optioned with a 70-liter Touring Tank offering an
approximately 50% increase in fuel storage according to the selling
dealer.


Chassis #4290224 is stamped on the identification plate under the hood,
and matches the numbers found on the body, engine block, and BMW Classic
certificate. Original BMW importer MOTAG of Dielsdorf, Switzerland is also
listed on the certificate as well as a separate body tag


The included binder contains pictures of the car, M Registry paperwork,
BMW 2002 Turbo articles and buyer's guides, technical drawings, a service
manual supplement, and more. Two driving videos are provided below.

