
This 1974 MG Midget was purchased by its current owner in 2011, reportedly
after being refurbished by an auto body shop owner in the early 2000s.
Power is from a 1,275cc inline-four that features dual SU carburetors and
is paired with a four-speed manual transmission. Additional equipment
includes painted 13'' wire wheels, a Moto-Lita steering wheel, chrome
bumpers, a luggage rack, and driving lights as well as a black convertible
top. The fuel pump, front brakes, and combination gauge were replacedA in
preparation for the sale. This Mk III Midget is offered by the seller on
behalf of its current owner with a black period hardtop, a soft top boot,
partial service records, and a clean Minnesota title in the owner's name.

1974 MG Midget

The 2000s refurbishment included a repaint in green, and the condition of
the paintwork is shown up close in the gallery below. Exterior features
include round rear wheel arches, chrome bumpers, and a luggage rack. The
Snugtop-brand hardtop is shown mounted above, and the car is also equipped
with a black folding soft top. Chrome mirrors are fitted to both doors,
while the body-colored rocker panels wear Midget badges.


Gray-painted wire wheels feature two-eared chrome knock-off nuts and wear
155/80R-13 Triumph Radial 2000 tires. Service records from July 2020 show
that the front brake calipers, pads, and rotors were replaced in addition
to theA parking brake cable. The front wheel bearings were also repacked.


The interior has been reupholstered in black vinyl with matching carpet
and a black padded dash. An aftermarket stereo has been added; the seller
states that a period-style radio will also be included in the sale.


AA wood-rimmed Moto-Lita steering wheel frames chrome-ringed Smiths
instrumentationA including aA 100-mph speedometer and a tachometer in
addition to oil pressure, water temperature, and fuel gauges. The
five-digit odometer shows just over 76k miles, with total mileage unknown.
A used replacement oil/temperature combination gauge was installedA in
July 2020.


The 1,275cc A-Series inline-four features dual SU sidedraft carburetors
and was equipped with an alternator in the 2000s. The July 2020 service
included an oil change, carburetor synchronization and mixture adjustment,
and replacement of the SU fuel pump.


Power is sent through a four-speed manual transmission. Additional
under-car and detail images are available in the gallery below along with
recent pre-sale service records. Videos of the car in motion are shown
below.

