
This 1974 Mercedes-Benz 450SLC is finished in Byzantine Gold Metallic over
tan leather, and itA  is powered by a 4.5-liter V8 paired with a
three-speed automatic transmission. During prior ownership, the car was
modified with European-specification headlights, Corello driving lights,
15'' Epsilon wheels, and an AMG exhaust and rear spoiler, and additional
equipment includes front fog lights, power windows, and air conditioning.
The car spent time in Florida, Colorado, and Arizona prior to its
acquisition by the seller on BaT in March 2018. Subsequent maintenance
reportedly included replacement of the horn and fluid services. This C107
now shows 63k miles and is offered with factory literature, service
records, two keys, and a clean Arizona title in the seller's name.

1974 Mercedes-Benz 450SLC

The car is finished in Byzantine Gold Metallic (422), and modifications
include European-specification headlights, front fog lights, Corello
driving lights, and an AMG rear spoiler. A series of nautical flags are
mounted on the left-front fender. Close-up photos of the body, lenses, and
trim can be viewed in the image gallery below.


Aftermarket 15a*^3 Epsilon wheels with gold faces and silver lips wear
older 225/60 Michelin XGT V4 tires, and a 14'' Bundt alloy wheel and spare
tire are mounted in the trunk.


The cabin features seats trimmed in tan leather with contrasting brown
carpets, along with burl wood accents on the dash, center stack, and gear
selector. Equipment includes power windows, air conditioning, and a Becker
Mexico stereo connected to ADS speakers and a trunk-mounted Sony Xplod
amplifier.


A four-spoke steering wheel fronts VDO instrumentation that includes a
160-mph speedometer and a 7k-rpm tachometer, and gauges for oil pressure,
coolant temperature, and fuel level. A VDO voltage gauge is fitted to the
center stack along with a ZT Driving Computer that shows distance
traveled, MPG, time, and speed. The six-digit odometer shows 63k miles,
approximately 1k of which were added by the seller.


The 4.5-liter M117 V8 features Bosch fuel injection, and power is sent to
the rear wheels through a three-speed automatic transmission. The seller
reportedly changed the engine oil, flushed the transmission fluid, and
replaced the horn.


An AMG exhaust is fitted, and additional underside images can be viewed in
the gallery.


Factory literature and a manual for the driving computer are included in
the sale, along with service records and two keys.

