
This 1975 Porsche 914 was recently acquired by the seller, reportedly out
of a 13-year period of storage. The car is finished in Malaga Red over a
refreshed black and red interior and is powered by a fuel-injected 2.0L
flat-four paired with a five-speed manual transaxle. Equipment includes
retractable headlights, black targa top, Mahle wheels, and a heated rear
window. Service within the last four months is said to have included the
replacement of the brake pads, battery tray and support, and fuel lines.
This 914 is now offered with a Porsche Production Specifications
certificate and a clean Washington title in the sellera**s name.

1975 Porsche 914 2.0

The exterior was reportedly refinished in Malaga Red (L30C) during
previous ownership in the 1990s. Paint blistering is evident on the front
of the car, along with rust near the middle of the front hood and on the
bottom sides of the windshield.


15a** Mahle wheels are fitted with Falken Ziex tires. Brake work within
the last four months is said to have included rebuilding the calipers and
replacing the brake lines, brake pads, and master cylinder.


The cabin was reupholstered in black vinyl with red houndstooth inserts
during the seller's ownership. The black basketweave door panels and black
carpets were also replaced. During previous ownership, water intrusion
occurred causing rust damage to the floor pan. A replacement floor pan
said to have been sourced from Restoration Design has been installed.
Photos of the rust and repair are presented in the gallery.


The four-spoke steering wheel frames VDO instrumentation including a
150-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm tachometer, and a fuel-level gauge. The
five-digit odometer shows 32k miles, a handful of which were added by the
seller. True mileage is unknown.


Corrosion is visible in the front trunk, which houses a fifth Mahle wheel.
The interior of the rear trunk is pictured in the gallery.


Power comes from a 2.0-liter flat-four equipped with Bosch D-Jetronic fuel
injection. Recent maintenance is said to have included replacement of the
steel and rubber fuel lines, fuel injector seals, pushrod tube seals,
plugs, and wires, along with an oil change, valve adjustment, and tune-up.
The smog pump has been removed and is included in the sale.


Power is sent to the rear wheels via a five-speed manual transaxle.
Additional underbody photos are presented in the gallery below.




The Porsche Production Specifications certificate shows the original
colors and engine displacement. Images of the engine serial number
stamping, body ID plate, and VIN plates are presented in the gallery.

