
This 1976 Triumph TR6 was purchased by the previous owner out of Seattle,
Washington in 2012 and subsequently imported to British Columbia, Canada,
where the seller acquired it in June 2019. The car is finished in yellow
with a black soft top over a black vinyl interior, and power is provided
by a 2.5-liter inline-six mated to a four-speed manual transmission. A
spin-on oil-filter adapter has been added, and service in spring 2020
included a valve adjustment, replacement of the rear output-shaft seal and
shifter-rod O-rings, as well as installation of a new distributor cap,
rotor, and spark-plug wires. This TR6 is now offered in Canada with a
binder containing records dating back to 2012, importation paperwork, a
service manual, a driving blanket, a Betmar wool felt hat, and
transferable British Columbia registration.

1976 Triumph TR6

The exterior is finished in yellow and features a black vinyl top with a
matching boot cover, chrome bumpers with black rubber overriders, and twin
bullet-style side mirrors. The seller has touched up spots in the engine
bay and the door jambs with Tremclad paint, and a dent measuring about 1''
x 1.5'' is noted at the front of the passenger-side door jamb.


Silver-finished 15'' factory steel wheels feature TR6 hub covers, polished
trim rings, and Michelin X red-line tires. The wheels were speed-balanced
in August 2019, according to the seller.


The cockpit features bucket seats upholstered in black vinyl with matching
door panels, dash pads, and carpets, as well as British Motor Heritage
carpeted floor mats. A new sun-visor kit was reportedly installed in June
2020. The seller notes a 1'' tear in the upper dash pad on the driver side
and a rip with unraveling in the carpet behind the passenger seat.


The wood-veneer dashboard houses Smiths instrumentation that includes a
140-mph speedometer and a 7k-rpm tachometer, along with gauges for engine
temperature, oil pressure, fuel level, and voltage. The five-digit
odometer shows approximately 15k miles, less than 500 of which were added
by the seller. The flasher unit was replaced in May 2020, and the
speedometer is noted to be jumpy at lower speeds.


The 2.5-liter inline-six is equipped with twin Zenith-Stromberg
carburetors, and a spin-on oil-filter adapter has been added. Work
performed during current ownership is said to have entailed:

* June 2019 a** Changed oil; replaced spark plugs
* May 2020 a** Adjusted valves; replaced valve-cover gasket,
oil-pressure line seal, and a battery terminal
* June 2020 a** Replaced distributor cap and rotor, spark-plug wires,
battery disconnect switch, battery hold down, hood insulation, and
radiator cowl assembly

A cold, dry compression test in April 2020 is said to have yielded
readings of 121, 118, 120, 118, 115, and 119 psi from front to back.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a four-speed manual transmission,
for which the rear output-shaft seal and the shifter-rod O-rings were
replaced in May 2020. Additional photos of the underbody are provided in
the gallery.

