
This 1979 Honda CBX was acquired by the seller in August 2012 and
subsequently underwent a refurbishment in silver from 2015 to 2017. Power
is from a 1,047cc inline-six that features rebuilt carburetors, a
reproduction exhaust system, a 530 chain conversion, upgraded ignitors,
and more, while shifting is through a five-speed transmission. Additional
work included rebuilding the fork with Race Tech components, fitting
A*hlins piggyback shocks, and overhauling the brakes with stainless steel
hoses. An oil change and valve clearance check were carried out in January
2020. This CBX is offered with owner's and service manuals, parts and
service receipts, an informational book, two keys, take-off parts, and a
clean Illinois title in the seller's name.

1979 Honda CBX

Bodywork includes a replacement rear cowl and was refinished in Perseus
Silver Metallic (NH-101M-U) paint with reproduction decals. A reproduction
seat cover was also fitted. Cracks are noted in the seat cowl underneath
the seat foam and taillight lens, as well as in the right side cover,
while the fuel tank safety decal has been left off. A narrated walk-around
video has been provided by the seller.


Silver Comstar wheels wear 19'' and 18'' Bridgestone Spitfire tires that
are said to have been mounted in 2017 and have been ridden approximately
500 miles. The 35mm conventional front fork was fitted with Race Tech
springs and gold valve emulators as well as new oil and dust seals, while
the double-sided rear swingarm features A*hlins S36P piggyback shocks. All
three brake calipers were rebuilt along with the rear master cylinder,
while the front master cylinder was replaced and stainless steel hoses
were fitted throughout.


Clip-on handlebars are mounted above the top triple clamp and feature
replacement factory grips as well as a choke lever on the left.
Instrumentation includes a 150-mph speedometer and a tachometer with a
9,500-rpm redline, both of which were fitted with new cables. The
five-digit odometer shows 19k miles, less than 500 of which have been
ridden by the seller.


The DOHC 1,047cc inline-six produced 105 horsepower when new and breathes
through six rebuilt 28mm Keihin carburetors as well as a reproduction
six-into-two exhaust system. Additional work included replacement of the
manifold boots, spark plugs and boots, air filter, valve cover seals, and
two of the three coil assemblies in addition to rebuilding the fuel
petcock and upgrading the ignitors to versions from a later model.


An oil change and valve clearance check were carried out in January 2020.
Power is transferred to the rear wheel through a five-speed transmission,
a converted 530 chain, and replacement sprockets.


An owner's manual, a service manual, parts receipts, an informational
book, two keys, and several removed stock parts are included in the sale.
Videos showing a cold-start, walk-around, and warm idle can be viewed
below.

