
This 1981 Volkswagen Vanagon Westfalia has spent much of its life in
California and was acquired by the current owner 21 years ago. The van is
finished in Ivory with a white Westfalia camper top over a brown interior,
and power is provided by an air-cooled 2.0L flat-four paired with a
four-speed manual transaxle. Equipment includes a kitchenette, swing-out
dining table, a flat-folding rear bench, curtains, rear bug screen, and
more. New tires were recently fitted, and a California emissions test was
completed in July 2020. This Vanagon Westfalia now shows 135k miles and is
offered on behalf of the current owner with accessories, a clean Carfax
report, and a clean California title.

1981 Volkswagen Vanagon Westfalia

The body is finished in Ivory (L567) and features include a white pop-up
camper roof with tan canvas soft sides along with a roof rack. A chip is
present on the front grille, and scuffs, scratches, fading, and surface
corrosion are noted on various area of the body. The provided Carfax
report shows no history of accidents or other damage.


14a*^3 steel wheels are fitted with chrome hub caps and Hankook Vantra LT
tires that show 2019 date codes. Braking is handled by front discs and
rear drums.


The swiveling front bucket seats are trimmed in brown vinyl with
multi-colored striped cloth inserts. Amenities include a heater, an
aftermarket shift knob, and a Blaupunkt head unit with Pioneer speakers.
Just under 135k miles are shown on the six-digit odometer. A tear is noted
on the driver's seat.


The kitchenette features folding tables, cabinets, a sink, a gas/electric
refrigerator, and a dual-burner propane/natural gas stove. Additional
amenities includes a striped cloth bench that folds flat into a bed, a
loft bed, brown privacy curtains for the cabin, and a removable rear bug
screen.


The air-cooled 2.0-liter flat-four is equipped with Bosch L-Jetronic fuel
injection and was factory-rated at 70 horsepower.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a four-speed manual transaxle.
Additional photos of the underbody, suspension, and brakes are viewable
below.


A selection of accessories, spare parts, manuals, and a car cover are
included in the sale.


The July 2020 Carfax report lists no accidents and shows history in
California from its first update in August 1991 through the most recent
entry in July 2019. A driving and walk-around video is shown below, along
with demonstrations of the kitchenette equipment.

