
This 1986 Honda VFR750 Interceptor is powered by a liquid-cooled 748cc V4
mated to a six-speed transmission and wears red, white, and blue bodywork
over an aluminum frame. Additional features include gear-driven dual
overhead cams, aluminum alloy crankcases, a hydraulic clutch, dual front
disc brakes, clip-on handlebars, a Pro-Link rear end, a blue two-up seat,
and Kerker mufflers. The bike was acquired by the selling dealer in May
2020, reportedly from its second owner of seven years, and was
subsequently fitted with removable vinyl race decals as well as
replacement Interceptor stickers. This VFR750F is offered with a clean
Oregon title.

1986 Honda VFR750 Interceptor

Bodywork includes a full fairing withA vinyl decals modeled after "Flying"
Fred Merkel's 1986 race bike. Photos showing the bike without the tribute
decals can be viewed in the gallery below. Replacement factory-style
Interceptor stickers have been affixed to the tail section. The bike is
equipped with an aluminum twin-spar frame, a blue two-up seat, a plastic
rear license bracket and mudguard, and fairing-mounted mirrors. Kerker
mufflers were fitted under previous ownership.


White three-spoke wheels wear Bridgestone Battleax tires measuring
120/80-16 front and 130/80-18 rear. Suspension consists of a 37mm
air-adjustable Showa fork with TRAC anti-dive technology as well as an
aluminum Pro-Link swingarm with a monoshock featuring remote preload
adjustability. Braking is from dual Nissin discs up front and a single
version in the rear.


Clip-on handlebars sit above the top triple clamp and feature a choke
lever on the left. Instrumentation includes a 175-mph speedometer, a
tachometer with an 11,500-rpm redline, a temperature gauge, and a
five-digit odometer showing 31k miles, 100 of which have been ridden by
the selling dealer.


The liquid-cooled, 90-degree 748cc V4 features aluminum alloy crankcases
and produced 104 horsepower when new thanks in part to dual overhead
gear-driven cams actuating 16 valves. Power is sent to the rear wheel
through a wet hydraulic clutch, a six-speed transmission, and a drive
chain. An oil change was reportedly carried out by the previous owner
within the past 200 miles. A narrated walk-around, cold-start, and riding
video can be viewed below.

