
This 1988 Ferrari 328 GTS is finished in red over tan leather and powered
by a 3.2L 32-valve V8 mated to a five-speed manual transaxle with a
limited-slip differential. Additional features consist of a removable roof
panel, pop-up headlamps, 16'' wheels, air conditioning, and a Pioneer
stereo. The car was acquired by the seller 10 years ago from Lamborghini
Houston in Texas, and an April 2020 service included replacement of the
timing belts and water pump, converting the air conditioning system to use
R134a refrigerant, and removal of the factory air injection system. This
328 is offered with manufacturer's literature, a Covercraft car cover,
records dating to 1993, a Carfax report, and a Texas title in the seller's
name.

1988 Ferrari 328 GTS

The car is finished in Rosso Corsa and features a removable black roof
panel that stows behind the seats as well as four exhaust outlets and
pop-up headlights that are shown raised in the gallery below.
AA walk-around video has been provided by the seller.


Factory 16a*^3 wheels feature Prancing Horse center caps and wear
Bridgestone Potenza S007A tires that are said to have been mounted in July
2020.


The cockpit features manually-adjustable seats trimmed in tan Connolly
leather, which extends to the door panels and center console. The air
conditioning system was converted to use R134a refrigerant during the 2020
service. Additional features include a Pioneer stereo, a leather-wrapped
Momo steering wheel, and a gated shifter for the dogleg-pattern five-speed
manual gearbox. The seller has provided anA interior tour video.


Stitched black leather lines the dash, which houses instrumentation
consisting of a 180-mph speedometer, a tachometer with a 7,800-rpm
redline, an analog clock, and gauges for oil pressure, coolant
temperature, oil temperature, and fuel level. The five-digit odometer
shows 34k miles, approximately 1,500 of which have been added by the
seller. Total mileage is unconfirmed.


The mid-mounted 3.2-liter Type F105 V8 was factory-rated at 270 horsepower
and 231 lb-ft of torque. A service performed in April 2020 at 34k miles
included replacement of the timing belts, tensioner bearings, water pump,
fluids, and filters. The factory air injection system was also removed.
AA cold-start video has been provided by the seller, and a second is
viewableA here.


Power is routed to the rear wheels through a five-speed manual transaxle
equipped with a limited-slip differential. Additional underbody
photographs are provided in the gallery below.


The August 2020 Carfax report indicates no accidents or other damage,
though a Not Actual Mileage (NAM) title is shown as having been issued in
September 1993. The seller believes the current mileage to be accurate
based on subsequent service records and documentation dating to the early
1990s. An acceleration video is presented below, and additional footage
can be found on the seller'sA Vimeo channel.

