
This 1988 Chevrolet Corvette was converted to Callaway Twin-Turbo
specification and delivered to Corvette engineer, race car driver, and
former director of GM Performance John Heinricy when new. Mr. Heinricy
kept the car until 1991, and it has since spent time with its current
owner in Oregon at two different points since the 1990s totaling
approximately 20 years. Power is from a twin-turbocharged 5.7L L98 V8, and
this is one of a small number B2Ks to be equipped with a Turbo 400
automatic transmission and a Laycock overdrive. The car is finished in
metallic blue over gray leather. This Corvette is offered on dealer
consignment with Callaway documentation, NCRS paperwork, service records,
a letter from Mr. Heinricy, NCRS documentation, an accident-free Carfax
report, and a clean Oregon title in the owner's name.

1988 Chevrolet Corvette Callaway Twin Turbo

The car is finished in Dark Blue Metallic (28U), and the moldings and door
handles were painted body color while with Heinricy according to the
included letter. Callaway badging adorns the hood and rear deck lid.
Close-up photos of the trim and finish are provided in the gallery below.


Replacement Dymag wheels measure 9.5''x17'' at all four corners and are
mounted with 275/40 Nitto NT555 tires. Braking is handled by four-wheel
discs with a J-55 setup up front, and the car was equipped with the
factory Sport Handling Package (Z52) when new.


The original Saddle Tan interior was changed to its present gray using
factory components under Heinricy's ownership. The front sport seats are
six-way power-adjustable, and other equipment includes includes power
windows and locks, automatic climate control, a Delco Bose cassette
stereo, and a Callaway boost gauge replacing one of the center dash vents.


A two-spoke steering wheel frames digital instrumentation including an
85-mph speedometer, a tachometer with a 6k-rpm redline, and switchable
auxiliary gauges controlled via a panel on the dash. The six-digit
mechanical odometer shows approximately 51k miles, 18k of which were added
by the current owner.


The 5.7-liter L98 V8 was converted to B2K twin-turbo configuration by
Callaway when new. The specification included proprietary .006''-oversized
pistons that lowered the compression ratio to 7.5:1, a forged crankshaft,
Clevite bearings, and stainless steel valves. Twin turbochargers feature
integrated wastegates and dual intercoolers under corresponding hood
ducts,A and the "Wonderbar" crossmember was modified to serve as an air
intake. The conversion raised output to 382 horsepower and 562 lb-ft of
torqueA according to period materials.


Power is sent to the rear wheels via a modified Turbo 400 automatic
transmission with a Laycock overdrive unit, a $6,500 option as shown on
the included build sheet. Both the transmission and overdrive unit were
serviced in 2011, and new U-joints were installed in 2014. Additional
photos of the free-flowing exhaust system and underside are provided in
the gallery. A service was performed by Callaway in January 2009, and an
oil change will be carried out in preparation for sale.


Copies of the Chevrolet and Callaway window stickers show a combined
retail and modification price to $67,136. Documentation from Callaway and
a magazine review of the 1988 Callaway Twin-Turbo are included in the
sale. An NCRS Judging Summary sheet is included from the NCRS San Jose
National Convention, and notes that the car was issued the American
Heritage Award. The seller notes that this is one of 49 such awards issued
since 1998.


The accident-free August 2020 Carfax report first updates in 1991 and
shows ownership in Oregon from 1992 through its most recent entry in 2014.
A drive video is viewable below.

