
This 1989 Mercedes-Benz 560SL is finished in Signal Red over beige leather
and powered by a 5.5-liter V8 mated to a four-speed automatic
transmission. Equipment includes a color-matched removable hardtop, a
black convertible soft top, burl wood trim, automatic climate control,
cruise control, and front fog lights. The car was sold new from Haverhill
Motor Sales in Massachusetts and purchased in 2013 by the current owner,
who has since added approximately 2k of the 18k miles now shown. Recent
maintenance is said to have included replacement of the tires, distributor
cap, distributor rotor, ignition wires, steering damper, an oxygen sensor,
an oil pressure switch, and filters and fluids. This 560SL is now offered
on behalf of its current owner with service records from new, factory
manuals, window sticker, an accident-free Carfax report, and clean
Massachusetts title.

1989 Mercedes-Benz 560SL

The car is finished in Signal Red (568O) with a matching removable hardtop
and a black convertible soft top. The US-market bumpers are accented with
chrome, and fog lights are mounted up front. Close-up photos of
imperfections are provided in the gallery below, along with photos of the
removable hardtop and included stand. The current owner states the black
soft top was rarely used.


Factory 15a*^3 Gullideckel wheels are wrapped in 205/65 Michelin Defender
tires that the seller states were installed within the last year. The
brake fluid was also reportedly flushed within the last year, and a
replacement steering damper was fitted.


The cabin includes seats upholstered in Beige leather (275) and features
burl wood accents on the center console and dash. Amenities include
automatic climate control, cruise control, a Becker Grand Prix stereo, and
power locks and windows.


The leather-wrapped steering wheel fronts VDO instrumentation that
includes a 170-mph speedometer and a 7k-rpm tachometer with an inset
clock, as well as a combination gauge for fuel level, oil pressure,
coolant temperature, and instant fuel economy. The six-digit odometer
shows just over 18k miles, approximately 2k of which were added by the
current owner.


The 5.5-liter M117 V8 was rated at 227 horsepower and 279 lb-ft of torque
when new. Recent maintenance included replacement of the distributor cap
and rotor, ignition wires, oxygen sensor, oil pressure switch, and filters
and fluids.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a four-speed automatic
transmission. Additional photos of the underside, suspension, and exhaust
are viewable in the gallery below.


The window sticker lists production data, factory colors, optional
equipment, and a total price of $65,780.


The May 2020 Carfax report lists no accidents or other damage and shows
recorded history in New Hampshire and Massachusetts beginning in April
1998 through its most recent entry in April 2019. A mileage inconsistency
is listed in April 2015.

Filed under: r107, sl

