
This 1991 Mercedes-Benz 420SEL is finished in black over black leather and
is powered by a 4.2-liter V8 mated to a four-speed automatic transmission.
Features include a power sunroof, 15'' alloy wheels, and power-adjustable
and heated front seats, a factory Becker AM/FM/cassette stereo with a
CD-changer, and power windows and locks. The car was first registered in
New Jersey, where it remained through its acquisition by the current owner
in 2007. During current ownership, 29k of the 105k miles it now shows were
added, and service reportedly included an overhaul of the air-conditioning
system, replacement of the tires, timing chain, guides, tensioners, fuel
injectors, and spark plugs, and refurbishment of the braking and
suspension systems. This W126 is offered on behalf of its owner's estate
with factory literature, a clean Carfax report, and a clean New Jersey
title.

1991 Mercedes-Benz 420SEL

The long-wheelbase exterior is finished in Black (040U) with contrasting
gray lower-body cladding. Exterior features include a power sunroof,
power-adjustable mirrors, headlight wipers, and chrome bumper and window
trim. The seller notes scratches and blemishes in the paint, and detailed
photos of the exterior are provided in the gallery.


Factory 15'' Gullideckel wheels are wrapped in 205/65 Pantera Touring A/S
tires that are said to have been fitted in June 2020. The seller states
that service also included replacement of the front calipers, front and
rear brake rotors, front and rear shocks, front control arm bushings, rear
stabilizer links, and ball joints.


The interior features heated and power-adjustable front seats upholstered
in black leather (261), along with a matching dashboard, door panels, and
carpets. Wood trim accents the dashboard, center console, and doors, and
additional amenities include automatic climate control, and cruise
control. The air-conditioning system was reportedly refurbished with a
replacement compressor and drier as well as a conversion to R134a
refrigerant, and the seller notes that the factory trunk-mounted CD
changer is intact and that the factory Becker head unit was rebuilt by
Becker Radio of New Jersey.


The leather-wrapped airbag steering wheel fronts VDO instrumentation that
includes a 160-mph speedometer and a tachometer with a 6k-rpm redline. The
six-digit odometer indicates just over 105k miles, approximately 29k of
which were added during current ownership.


The 4.2-liter M116 V8 was factory rated at 221 horsepower and 240 lb-ft of
torque when new, which is sent to the rear wheels through a four-speed
automatic transmission. Service in 2014 is said to have included the
replacement of the injectors, valve stem seals, timing chain, guide rails,
timing chain tensioner, and valve cover gaskets. In June 2020, the owner
reportedly replaced the spark plug wires, distributor cap, distributor
rotor, and center muffler. Fluid flushes were performed at the same time,
including a transmission fluid change with the replacement of the filter
and filter gasket.


The July 2020 Carfax report is free of accidents or other damage and
displays registration in New Jersey from its first entry in September 1991
through its most recent entry in July 2019.

