
This 1991 Rover Mini Cooper Mk VI was imported to the US from England in
November 2018 and was converted to left-hand-drive in 2019. It is finished
in red and white over a black interior, and power is provided by a
carbureted 1.3-liter inline-four paired with a four-speed manual
transaxle. Equipment includes a tinted glass sunroof, 12'' Minilite-style
wheels, front bumper-mounted fog lamps, and a Pioneer CD stereo. This Mini
Cooper was acquired by the current owner two years ago and is now offered
on their behalf with import documents, factory manuals, and a clean North
Carolina title.

1991 Rover Mini Cooper 1.3

The exterior is finished in red with a white roof, stripes, and graphics,
including "Mini Cooper" and "Italian Job" scripts. Equipment includes a
tinted glass sunroof, wheel-arch flares, bullet-style mirrors, and four
front bumper-mounted fog lamps that were installed in 2019. The
right-front fender was repaired and refinished to repair a crack in
November 2019, and the seller notes a mark in the paint on the trunk cover
from a removed decal as well as bubbling behind the left rear wheel. A
video of the lights in operation can be seen here.


12'' Minilite-style wheels are finished in silver and are wrapped in
165/60 Yokohama A539 tires that were installed in 2019 along with
replacement KYB shocks. Braking is handled by front discs and rear drums.


The interior is trimmed with black carpets, color-matching door panels,
patterned black cloth seat inserts, and red piping on the seats and door
panels. Amenities include an aftermarket 12-volt accessory port, a burl
wood dash panel, and a Pioneer CD stereo.


Instrumentation consists of a 110-mph speedometer, an 8k-rpm tachometer,
and gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The five-digit odometer
shows 64k miles, approximately 3k of which were added by the current owner
in two years.


The 1,275cc inline-four features a single SU carburetor and sends power to
the front wheels through a four-speed manual transaxle. The seller states
that a belt and fluid service was performed in the last 1k miles.


Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery.

