
This 1994 BMW 850CSi is #107 of 225 examples produced for the US market,
and is finished in in black over matching leather. The car was sold new by
Courtesy Automotive Center of Chico, California and remained in the state
until it was sold on BaT in September 2018 before being acquired by the
current owner in July 2019. Power is provided by a 5.6-liter V12 paired
with a six-speed manual transmission, and equipment includes a Dinan
performance chip, exhaust headers, and an exhaust system as well as a
sunroof, a period car phone, power-adjustable and heated front seats,
automatic climate control, an onboard computer, and a factory cassette
stereo. Service performed during current ownership has consisted of
repairs to the sunroof and replacement of the water pump and brake master
cylinder. This E31 CSi indicates just over 133k miles and is offered by
the seller on behalf of the current owner with service records, a clean
Carfax report, and a clean Arizona title in the owner's name.

1994 BMW 850CSi 6-Speed

The body is finished in Schwarz II (669) and features pop-up headlights,
integrated fog lamps, and a power-operated sunroof. The front bumper cover
was repainted during previous ownership, and the seller believes that the
hood and right quarter panel have also been refinished. The sunroof motor
and rods were repaired by the current owner's in-house mechanic. Paint
meter readings from multiple panels can be viewed in the photo gallery
below.


Staggered-width 17a** wheels are wrapped in 235/45 and 265/40 Bridgestone
Potenza tires. The seller reports that the brake master cylinder and
reservoir were replaced during current ownership.


The cabin is upholstered in Black Nappa leather with matching carpets, and
the dash, center console, and door panels are accented with burl wood
veneer. Amenities include heated and power-adjustable front seats, cruise
control, dual-zone automatic climate control, an onboard computer, a
period car phone, and an AM/FM cassette stereo. The seller notes that the
headliner was replaced in 2018.


Instrumentation consists of a 190-mph speedometer and a tachometer along
with gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The odometer indicates
133k miles, of which approximately 2k have been added by the current
owner.


The 5.6L S70B56 V12 was factory-rated at 372 horsepower with 332 lb-ft of
torque. A Dinan performance chip, exhaust headers, and an exhaust system
were installed by a previous owner. Service performed since 2019 has
consisted of replacing the water pump, bleeding the clutch system, and
completing an oil and filter change.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual transmission.
Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery.


The June 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history in California,
Oregon, and Arizona through the latest entry in July 2019. The seller has
provided an overview video below.

