
This 2000 Porsche 911 Carrera was sold new by The Porsche Store of
Richardson, Texas and remained registered in the state until it was
relocated to Florida, where the seller acquired it in 2019. The car is
finished in black over matching leather and powered by a 3.4-liter
flat-six paired with a six-speed manual transaxle. Equipment includes an
Aerokit, 18'' Sport Classic wheels, Porsche Stability Management, a
sunroof, automatic climate control, and a Hi-Fi sound system. An LN
Engineering IMS bearing was installed in April 2019 along with replacement
of the rear main seal, timing chain tensioners, water pump, thermostat,
and more. This 996 indicates 63k miles and is offered in California with a
window sticker, manufacturer's literature, service records from current
ownership, a clean Carfax report, and a clean Florida title in the
seller's name.

2000 Porsche 911 Carrera Coupe 6-Speed

The car is finished in Black (L741) and features integrated fog lamps, a
power sunroof, and an Aerokit, the latter of which was installed during
previous ownership. The seller notes paint chips are visible on the
forward facing surfaces.

This is a re-list after the car previously sold on BaT in July 2020 and
the winning bidder failed to follow through with their commitment to
purchase. This was not due to any fault with the car, and the winner has
been banned from future participation on BaT.


The 18'' Sport Classic wheels were fitted by a previous owner and wear
Hankook Ventus V12 Evo tires. The brake pads have been replaced during
current ownership and a fluid flush was performed in April 2019. The
seller reports that the rear tires are in need of replacement.


The cabin is upholstered in black leather (AG) with matching carpets that
are protected by embroidered floor mats. The dash, center console,
instrument cluster surround, and door panels are accented with carbon
fiber trim. Amenities include power-adjustable front seats, cruise
control, automatic climate control, a factory CD player, and a Hi-Fi sound
system.


A leather-wrapped steering wheel frames a central tachometer with a
7,200-rpm redline and a 175-mph speedometer along with gauges for voltage,
coolant temperature, fuel level, and oil pressure. The odometer indicates
63k miles, of which approximately 3k have been added by the seller.


The 3.4-liter flat-six was factory-rated at 296 horsepower and 258 lb-ft
of torque. An LN Engineering single-row IMS bearing was installed in April
2019 by Driver's Choice Motors of Longwood, Florida along with replacement
of the rear main seal, timing chain tensioners, water pump, and
thermostat. The rear engine mounts have also been replaced.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual transaxle.
Additional underbody photos can be viewed in the gallery.


The window sticker shows factory colors and options as well as an original
MSRP of $71,805.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history in Texas and Florida
through the latest entry in April 2019. A start-up, walk-around, and
driving video can be viewed below.

