
This 2000 BMW M5 was delivered new to Hendrick Imports of Charlotte, North
Carolina and recently acquired by the selling dealer, who states that it
was traded-in by the original owner. The car is finished in metallic blue
over two-tone extended leather and powered by a 4.9-liter V8 paired with a
six-speed manual transmission. Features include a limited-slip
differential, xenon headlights, fog lamps, a sunroof, Dynamic Stability
Control, heated and power-adjustable front seats, cruise control,
A automatic climate control, a 14-speaker sound system, and navigation.
This E39 M5 indicates 48k miles and is offered by the selling dealer with
a window sticker, service records, a clean Carfax report, and a clean
Virginia title.

2000 BMW M5 6-Speed

The car is finished in Avus Blue Metallic and features xenon headlights
with washers, integrated fog lamps, Shadowline window trim, a glass
sunroof, and quad exhaust outlets. The selling dealer states that both
right doors were repainted during previous ownership to correct scratches.


Factory 18a*^3 M Double Spoke wheels are finished in Chrome Shadow and
wear Michelin Pilot Super Sport tires. The four-wheel ventilated disc
brakes are assisted by BMW's Dynamic Brake Control system.


The cabin is upholstered in Le Mans Blue and black Nappa extended leather
with black carpets and aluminum trim on the dashboard, door panels, and
center console. Amenities include heated and power-adjustable M design
front sport seats, cruise control, automatic climate control, an
illuminated shift knob, a 14-speaker sound system, and navigation. The
selling dealer notes that the navigation disc has been lost.


A multifunction steering wheel frames a 185-mph speedometer and a
tachometer with a variable redline along with gauges for fuel level, oil
temperature, and coolant temperature. The odometer indicates 48k miles, of
which approximately 200 have been added by the selling dealer.


The 4.9-liter DOHC S62 V8 produced 394 horsepower and 369 lb-ft of torque
when new.


Power is sent to the rear wheels throughA a six-speed manual transmission
and a limited slip differential. Additional underside photos can be viewed
in the gallery.


The window sticker confirms delivery to Hendrick Imports, and lists
factory colors and equipment as well as an original MSRP of $72,070.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
registration and service history with a single previous owner in Virginia
from new.

Filed under: 5 series, 5-series, e39, e39 m5

