
This 2004 GMC Sierra 1500 SLE is a single-cab Sportside short-box pickup
that is finished in Dark Spiral Gray Metallic over Dark Pewter cloth, and
power is supplied by a 5.3-liter LM7 V8 mated to a four-speed automatic
transmission and a dual-range transfer case. Features include a stepside
cargo box with a spray-in bedliner and a vinyl tonneau cover, chrome side
steps, a tow hitch receiver, front fog lights, bucket seats, air
conditioning, cruise control, and a factory AM/FM/CD/cassette stereo. The
truck was first registered in Pennsylvania, and it remained with a single
registered owner prior to its recent acquisition by the selling dealer.
This Sierra now has 55k miles and is offered with a Carfax report and a
clean Pennsylvania title.

2004 GMC Sierra 1500 SLE Sportside 4x4

The exterior is finished in Dark Spiral Gray Metallic (805K) and features
a stepside cargo box. Factory equipment includes fog lights,
chrome-accented front and rear bumpers, a trailer hitch receiver, a
tailgate guard, a heated rear window, power-adjustable mirrors, a spray-in
bedliner, and 4 *4 graphics. An aftermarket vinyl tonneau cover, chrome
side steps, and tinted window vent shades are fitted. The Carfax report
lists damage occurring in December 2004, with no further information
available.


Factory 16'' chrome-finished steel wheels are wrapped in 265/75 BFGoodrich
All-Terrain KO tires. Equipment includes an independent front suspension
with a 30mm stabilizer bar, as well as four-wheel disc brakes with an
anti-lock system.


The interior is trimmed in Dark Pewter cloth (69D) and features bucket
seats with a fold-up console for a third middle seat. Amenities include
dual-zone climate control with air conditioning, black WeatherTech molded
rubber floor mats, cruise control, and a factory AM/FM/cassette/CD stereo.


A leather-wrapped airbag steering wheel fronts instrumentation that
includes a 120-mph speedometer, a 6k-rpm tachometer, and a digital
odometer that indicates just over 55k miles.


The 5.3-liter LM7 V8 was factory rated at 295 horsepower and 330 lb-ft of
torque when new.


Power is sent to the rear or all four wheels through a four-speed
automatic transmission and a push-button dual-range transfer case.
Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery.


The August 2020 Carfax report lists the aforementioned accident in
December 2004 and shows history in Pennsylvania from a single registered
owner through its most recent entry in December 2019.

