
This 2011 Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG was sold new from Mercedes-Benz of
Arlington, Virginia, and was acquired by the seller in December 2016. The
car is finished in Iridium Silver Metallic over a black Exclusive leather
interior and is powered by a 6.2-liter DOHC V8 paired with a seven-speed
dual-clutch automatic transaxle and a limited-slip differential. Equipment
includes a powered rear wing, bi-xenon headlights, aluminum interior trim,
automatic climate control, the Memory Package, and gullwing doors.
Scheduled maintenance was reportedly performed in July 2020. This SLS AMG
shows 36k miles and is now offered with service records, factory books, a
clean Carfax report, and a clean California title in the seller's name.

2011 Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG

The aluminum bodywork is finished in Iridium Silver Metallic, and
equipment includes a powered rear wing, bi-xenon headlamps, and gullwing
doors. The seller states that the passenger-side door and front lip were
repainted to correct scratches. Close-up photos of the body panels, trim,
and lenses can be viewed in the gallery.


Factory staggered wheels measure 19'' up front and 20'' at the rear and
wear 265/35 and 295/30 Michelin Pilot Super Sport tires respectively.
Braking is from multi-piston calipers and slotted and cross-drilled rotors
at all four corners.


The cockpit is upholstered in black Exclusive leather with matching
carpets and silver trim on the doors and center console. Amenities include
automatic climate control, heated power-adjustable seats, the Memory
Package, and Nappa leather door-sill inserts. Wear is noted on the outside
bolster of the driver's seat.


Instrumentation consists of a 240-mph speedometer, a 9k-rpm tachometer, a
multi-function display, and gauges for fuel level and oil pressure. The
digital odometer shows 36k miles, approximately 3k of which were added by
the seller.


The hand-assembled 6.2-liter M159 V8 produced 563 horsepower and 479 lb-ft
of torque when new. Power is routed to the rear wheels through a
rear-mounted seven-speed dual-clutch automatic transaxle and a
limited-slip differential. The seller states that a "Service A" was
performed in July 2020.


The March 2020 Carfax report indicates no accidents or other damage and
shows registration history in Virginia, Florida, and California through
its most recent entry in June 2019.

