
This 2013 BMW M3 coupe was sold new by JMK BMW of Springfield, New Jersey
and acquired in 2016 by the seller who registered it in North Carolina
before relocating it to California. The car is finished in white over
black leather and a 4.0-liter S65 V8 drives the rear wheels through a
six-speed manual transmission. Equipment includes the Competition and Cold
Weather packages as well as a limited-slip differential, a carbon fiber
roof, Autotecknic carbon fiber mirror caps, power-adjustable and heated
front sport seats, Comfort Access, automatic climate control, and iDrive
infotainment with navigation. This E92 M3 indicates approximately 50k
miles and is offered with an Mporium aluminum undertray, a CarPlay
retrofit kit, removed factory mirror caps, manufacturer's literature,
service records from current ownership, an accident-free Carfax report,
and a clean California title.

2013 BMW M3 Coupe Competition Package 6-Speed

The car is finished in Alpine White (300) and features xenon headlights,
iND painted front reflectors, Autotecknic carbon fiber mirror caps, a
carbon fiber roof, Shadowline trim, rear parking sensors, and quad exhaust
outlets. Aftermarket tint film has been applied to the taillights and the
rear and side windows. The seller notes a blemish on the right rocker
panel, paint chips on the front bumper cover, and scuffs on the underside
of the front air dam.


Staggered-width 19'' BMW Style 359 wheels wear 245/35 and 265/35 Michelin
Pilot Sport 4S tires that were fitted at approximately 45k miles. The
Competition Package included the lightweight wheels along with a lowered
suspension and remapped Dynamic Stability Control and Electronic Damping
Control systems. The previous owner painted the brake calipers red, and
the rotors and pads were replaced at approximately 40k miles.


The cabin is upholstered in Black Novillo Leather upholstery (NSCW) with
matching carpets that are protected by M3-branded floor mats, and Carbon
Leather trim accents the dash and door panels. Amenities include Comfort
Access, heated and power-adjustable front sport seats, cruise control,
automatic climate control, and iDrive infotainment with navigation and
support for BMW Apps, BMW Assist, and Bluetooth. The seller installed a
shift knob from an F10 M5. An uninstalledA Kremersino wireless CarPlay kit
is included in the sale.


A multifunction steering wheel sits ahead of a 200-mph speedometer and an
M-branded tachometer with a variable redline along with gauges for fuel
level and oil temperature. The odometer indicates just over 50k miles, of
which approximately 12k have been added by the seller.


The 4.0-liter S65 V8 produced 414 horsepower with 295 lb-ft of torque when
new. An oil and filter change was performed in early 2020.


Power is delivered to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual
transmission and a limited-slip differential. Additional photos of the
underside are presented in the gallery below.


Manufacturer's literature, two key fobs, and service records from current
ownership are included in the sale.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
registration and service history in New Jersey, Maryland, Pennsylvania,
Virginia, North Carolina, and California. A driving video can be viewed
below.

