
This 2014 Maserati Gran Turismo Sport was sold new by Maserati of Fort
Lauderdale, Florida and acquired by the current owner from Maserati Of
Walnut Creek, California in 2018. The car is finished in white over
blackA leather and powered by a 4.7-liter V8 paired with a ZF
six-speedA automatic transmission. Equipment includes 20a*^3 Neptune
wheels, a Skyhook adjustable suspension, an Alcantara headliner, heated
and power-adjustable front seats, an 11-speaker Bose surround sound
system, and navigation. This GranTurismo Sport indicates just under 25k
miles and is offered on behalf of the current owner with a window sticker,
a battery maintainer, manufacturer's literature, a clean Carfax report,
and a clean California title.

2014 Maserati GranTurismo Sport

The Pininfarina-designed body is finished in Bianco Eldorado and Sport
models featured revised fascias for improved aerodynamics when compared to
the standardA GranTurismo. Additional equipment includes xenon headlights,
fog lamps, chrome-trimmed fender vents, and parking sensors.


Optional 20a*^3 Neptune wheels are finished in blackA and wear Pirelli P
Zero tires that show date codes from 2017. An adjustable Skyhook
suspension was standard on the Gran Turismo Sport, as were red-finished
multi-piston brake calipers over drilled and slotted rotors.


The cabin is upholstered inA Nero Poltrona Frau leather with optional
white deviated stitching. Amenities include an Alcantara headliner, heated
and power-adjustable front seats with Trident logos in the headrests,
high-gloss trim, dual-zone automatic climate control, an 11-speaker Bose
surround sound system, and navigation with a 30 GB Jukebox hard drive.


A wood-trimmed steering wheel frames a 200-mph speedometer, a tachometer
with a 7,500-rpm redline, and a color LCD screen along with gauges for
fuel level and coolant temperature. The digital odometer indicates just
under 25k miles, of which approximately 3k have been added by the current
owner.


The 4.7-liter V8 was revised for the GranTurismo Sport model and developed
454 horsepower with 384 lb-ft of torque, which is sent to the rear wheels
through a ZF six-speed automatic transmission. A service is said to have
been performed in January 2020. The current owner states a certified
pre-owned warranty remains with the car until April 28, 2021.


A window sticker, two keys, a battery maintainer, and manufacturer's
literature are included in the sale.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history in Florida,
Connecticut, and California. There is currently a lien on the car, and the
current ownera**s lender will need to be paid off before the title can be
transferred to the next owner.

