
This 2006 Lotus Elise is a black-over-black example that is powered by a
Toyota-sourced 1.8L inline-four mated to a six-speed manual transaxle. It
is equipped with air conditioning, a rear spoiler, and removable roof
panels, as well as the Sport and Touring packages, which added leather
seats, sound deadening, power windows, forged wheels, twin oil coolers,
and a track-tuned suspension. Modifications include a baffled oil pan,
upgraded rear tie-rods, rear motor mount inserts, and a smaller rear-view
interior mirror. Recent maintenance included an oil change and replacement
of the idler pulley, an accessory belt, and the tires. This Elise now has
21k miles and is offered by the selling dealer in California with a Carfax
report, records dating back to 2006, two tops, accessories and tools, and
a clean Washington title.

21k-Mile 2006 Lotus Elise

The composite bodywork is finished in Starlight Black. Features include a
rear spoiler, a rear diffuser, a removable body-color roof panel, and a
removable insulated soft top. The Carfax report shows an accident
occurring in August 2009, which the selling dealer states resulted in the
replacement of the rear clamshell.


The optional Sport package added Bilstein shocks, Eibach springs, an oil
cooler, and staggered-diameter forged alloy wheels. The selling dealer
states that the latter were recently mounted with Nankang Sportnex NS-2R
tires measuring 205/45 up front and 225/45 out back, and that the rear tie
rods were upgraded.


The interior is trimmed in black over exposed aluminum, and the Touring
Pack includes leather seats, power windows, air conditioning, floor
carpets, and additional sound insulation. A Sony CD stereo is fitted,
which the selling dealer states is incorrectly wired. The selling dealer
also notes a rattle emanating from one of the speakers.


The leather-wrapped steering wheel frames a 160-mph speedometer and a
10k-rpm tachometer. The digital odometer indicates 21k miles.


The Toyota-sourced 1.8L 2ZZ-GE inline-four is mounted amidships and was
rated from the factory at 189 horsepower at 7,800 rpm and 138 lb-ft of
torque at 6,800 rpm when new. Recent maintenance performed included an oil
change, fitting a Gates accessory drive belt, and replacement of the idler
pulley. The selling dealer states that a recall to address the ECU was
performed in 2018.


Power is delivered to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual
transaxle, and the seller states that the fluid was changed in 2018.
Modifications include a baffled oil pan and rear motor mount inserts.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows the aforementioned 2009 accident and
lists registration history in Washington through its most recent entry in
May 2020.

