
This 2000 Acura NSX-T was sold new Delray Acura of Delray Beach, Florida
and resided in Nevada before being acquired in 2012 by the current owner
who subsequently relocated it to New Jersey. The car is finished in New
Formula Red over Camel leather and powered by by a 3.2-liter VTEC V6
paired with a six-speed manual transaxle. Service performed during current
ownership has included replacement of the timing belt, water pump,
serpentine belt, and coolant hoses in 2012, while the alternator was
replaced in in 2019, and new tires, fluids, and oxygen sensors were
installed in 2020. This NSX-T shows just under 26k miles and is offered on
behalf of the current owner with a window sticker, a copy of the original
purchase agreement, manufacturer's literature, service records, a clean
Carfax report, and a clean New Jersey title.

26k-Mile 2000 Acura NSX-T 6-Speed

The aluminum bodywork is finished in New Formula Red (R-510) and features
pop-up headlights, electric side mirrors, and a removable roof panel that
can be seen both installed and stowed under the rear glass. Photos of body
panel VIN tags and paint meter readings from multiple panels can be viewed
in the gallery below.


Factory 16a*^3 and 17a*^3 wheels were mounted with new 205/45 and 245/40
BF Goodrich G-Force Rival in preparation for sale. The suspension is
comprised of front and rear double wishbones, and braking is handled by
ventilated steel rotors at all four corners.


The cockpit is upholstered in camel leather with matching carpets and a
contrasting black dash, center console, and upper door panels. Amenities
include power-adjustable seats, cruise control, automatic climate control,
and a factory Bose sound system with a cassette player and a trunk-mounted
CD changer.


Instrumentation consists of a 180-mph speedometer and a tachometer with an
8k-rpm redline along with gauges for oil pressure, coolant temperature,
fuel level, and voltage. Just under 26k miles are shown on the six-digit
odometer, of which approximately 9k have been added by the current owner.


The 3.2-liter C32A V6 was factory-rated at 290 horsepower at 7,100 rpm
with 224 lb-ft of torque at 5,500 rpm. A timing belt and water pump
service was performed in July 2012 along with replacement of the
serpentine belt and coolant hoses, while a new alternator was fitted in
September 2019. Additional service performed in June 2020 consisted of
replacing the oxygen sensors and completing an oil and filter change.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual transaxle,
which received new fluid in June 2020. Additional photos of the underside
showing the floors, undertrays, and aluminum suspension components can be
viewed in the gallery below.


A window sticker showing an original MSRP of $88,745 is included in the
sale along with a copy of the original sales agreement and service
records.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history with three total
owners in Florida, Nevada, and New Jersey.

