
This 1997 Porsche 911 Turbo S is finished in Guards Red over Classic Grey
and is one of approximately 180 examples produced for the US market. A
twin-turbocharged 3.6L flat-six powers all four wheels through a six-speed
manual transaxle. The Turbo S model received larger turbochargers from the
factory, as well as an extra oil cooler, integrated rear fender scoops,
unique exterior aerodynamics, larger brakes with yellow calipers, a
full-leather interior with carbon fiber trim, and a quad-outlet exhaust.
This example was optioned from the factory with hard-back sport seats, a
self-dimming rearview mirror, and red interior stitching. The seller
acquired the car from the original owner five years ago and has since
added about 500 of the 26k indicated miles. This 993 Turbo S is now
offered in Plano, Texas, with a Porsche Certificate of Authenticity, clean
Carfax report, car cover, factory manuals and tools, service records, and
a clean Montana title in the name of the sellera**s LLC.

26k-Mile 1997 Porsche 911 Turbo S

All Turbo S models were built by the Porsche Exclusive department and can
be distinguished from a standard 993 Turbo by their rear fender vents,
yellow brake calipers, biplane rear spoiler, four-tipped exhaust system,
and Aerokit front spoiler with unique venting and fog light placement.
This example is finished in Guards Red and in 2015 had both of its bumper
covers refinished by Rusnak Westlake Porsche of Thousand Oaks, California.


Factory 18a*^3 cast alloy wheels wear a satin finish and are mounted with
Pirelli P Zero Rosso tires sized 225/40 up front and 285/30 out back. The
center caps feature machined Turbo S script, and each corner is pictured
individually in the gallery. Braking is managed by ventilated and
cross-drilled rotors paired with yellow four-piston calipers all around.


The hard-back sport seats feature body-colored shells and are trimmed in
Classic Grey leather with deviated red stitching. The cabin is also
equipped with leather-wrapped dash vents, window switches, and seatbelt
covers. Carbon fiber trim adorns the dashboard, shift knob, parking brake
handle, door inserts, and door sills. The latter feature Turbo S script,
and the front trunk is lined with model-specific carpet.


A four-spoke steering wheel with carbon fiber trim fronts white VDO
instrumentation located in a carbon fiber surround. The
centrally-positioned tachometer displays a 6,500-rpm redline and is
accompanied by a 200-mph speedometer, combination gauges, and a clock. The
six-digit mechanical odometer displays just under 26k miles, about 500 of
which have been added by the seller over the past five years.


The twin-turbocharged 3.6-liter flat-six of the Turbo S features larger
K24 turbochargers and an upgraded Bosch Motronic engine control unit. It
produced 424 horsepower and 423 lb-ft of torque when new, an increase over
the standard Turbo. Power is sent to all four wheels through a six-speed
manual transaxle and limited-slip differential. The turbochargers were
rebuilt by Rusnak Westlake Porsche in 2015, and Porsche of Plano performed
an oil change service in October 2019, as well as a multi-point inspection
in June 2020.


The option code sticker shows that the car was delivered with the
following factory equipment:

* XF7 a** Leather cover for tray or cassette slots behind parking brake
* XSR a** Painted sports seat backrest
* XX1 a** Leather-edged floor mats with Porsche script
* XX2 a** Illuminated footwell
* X77 a** Carbon steering wheel, leather-covered airbag module
* 373 a** Sports seat, left, height electrically adjustable
* 374 a** Sports seat, right, height electrically adjustable
* 426 a** Without rear window wiper
* 650 a** Sun-moon-roof


Additional underbody photos are included in the gallery below.


Factory accessories include tools, a tire bag, gloves, an air compressor,
a spare key, a front license plate mount, and a jack. A car cover and
owner's books are also included.


The Porsche Certificate of Authenticity states that this Turbo S was
completed on May 20, 1997 finished in Guards Red over Classic Grey
leather. Factory serial numbers and optional equipment are also listed,
along with an MSRP of $153,585.


The Carfax report shows no accidents or other issues, as well as history
in Florida, California, Montana, and Texas. A walk-around video and an
interior tour are presented below, along with a cold-start and driving
demonstration.

