
This 1995 Chevrolet Corvette ZR-1 shows just 26 miles and is one of 448
ZR1 examples produced for the model year. The car is finished in Torch Red
over black leather and powered by a Lotus-designed and Mercury
Marine-assembled 5.7-liter LT5 V8 paired with a six-speed manual
transmission. Equipment includes Selective Ride and Handling,
power-adjustable seats, automatic climate control, and a Delco-Bose
cassette/CD stereo. Acquired by the selling dealer in July 2012, this
final-year C4 ZR-1 is offered with two roof panels, a window sticker, a
build sheet, manufacturer's literature, a clean Carfax report, and clean
North Carolina title.

26-Mile 1995 Chevrolet Corvette ZR-1

This example is finished in Torch Red and features wider rear bodywork and
a convex rear fascia unique to the ZR-1. Additional equipment
includesA pop-up headlights, fog lamps, a removable roof panel, and dual
exhaust outlets. An additional blue removable roof panel can be seen in
the rear cargo area. The window sticker remains affixed to the right side
of the windshield.


Staggered-width 17a*^3 wheels wear the original Goodyear Eagle GS-C tires
that measure 275/40 up front and 315/35 out back. The suspension tuning,
steering, and braking were designed in consultation with Lotus during
their time as a subsidiary of General Motors. The three-mode adjustable
suspension system is controlled by a knob on the center console.


The cabin is upholstered in black leather with matching plastics and
carpets. Amenities include power-adjustable bucket seats with Corvette
embroidery in the headrests, cruise control, automatic climate control,
and a factory Delco-Bose Gold Series CD/cassette sound system.


An airbag steering wheel framesA a digital speedometer and an analog
tachometer along with gauges for oil pressure, oil temperature, coolant
temperature, and voltage. The digital odometer indicates 26 miles.


The aluminum block 5.7-liter LT5 V8 features four overhead cams and four
valves per cylinder, and was designed in partnership with Lotus with
manufacturing completed by Mercury Marine. Factory power output was quoted
at 405 horsepower when new, and an oil and filter change was performed in
July 2020.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a six-sped manual transmission.
Additional underbody photos are included in the gallery below.

The window sticker copy lists factory colors and equipment as well as an
original MSRP of $69,553. A copy of the build sheet and manufacturer's
literature are also included in the sale.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
history in Maryland and North Carolina. The selling dealer states that the
May 1995 entry showing 59 miles was recorded in error due to a misprint on
the original title, which can be viewed in the gallery below.

