
This 1989 Porsche 911 Speedster is one of 823 US-market examples produced
for the model year and was purchased new from Max Dial Porsche-Audi in
Inglewood, California. It was relocated to the East coast in 1992 and
resided in Connecticut, New York, and New Jersey with its original owner
before being acquired by the selling dealer in 2020. The car is finished
in Linen Gray Metallic over a black partial leather interior, and power is
provided by a numbers-matching 3.2-liter flat-six paired to a G50
five-speed manual transaxle. Equipment includes heated and power
adjustable seats, a factory short shifter, a three-spoke horn, and more. A
Porsche Classic Technical Inspection was performed in 2020 following
replacement of the starter, engine mounts, tires, battery, and fluids.
This 911 Speedster now shows 33k miles and is offered by the selling
dealer with a window sticker, manufacturer's literature, service records,
a Porsche Classic Technical Certificate, clean Carfax and AutoCheck
reports, and a clean Texas title.

33k-Mile 1989 Porsche 911 Speedster

The Speedster shares its widened rear bodywork with the contemporary
Turbo, and also features a unique shortened windscreen, side windows, and
a double-bubble fiberglass rear deck. This example is finished in Linen
Grey Metallic (550), and paint meter readings provided in the gallery show
thicknesses between 3.5-10.0 mils over much of the car, while higher
readings are captured on the hood, left rear quarter panel, and trailing
edge of the driver's door. New bumper screws and rear fender beading were
installed in March 2020, and the seller states that the manually-operated
soft top has been replaced.


Staggered-width 16'' Fuchs wheels feature black centers and polished lips.
BF Goodrich g-Force Comp 2 tires measuring 205/55 up front and 245/40 out
back were installed in May 2020, and a four-wheel alignment was also
performed at this time. The Speedster shared suspension and brake
components with the contemporary 911 Turbo, including four-piston calipers
with cross-drilled and vented rotors.


The cabin is upholstered in black partial leather with matching carpets,
and equipment includes power-adjustable and heated front seats,
driver-side power lumbar adjustment, a short shifter, black velour luggage
compartment linings, and a Hofco alarm system. The original Blaupunkt
Charleston stereo has been replaced with a period Blaupunkt Portland SQR26
unit.


A factory three-spoke steering wheel with an enameled crest and raised hub
frames a 160-mph speedometer, a tachometer with a 6,300-rpm redline, an
analog clock, and a quartet of auxiliary gauges. Just over 33k miles are
shown on the six-digit odometer.


The 3.2-liter flat-six features Bosch LE-Jetronic fuel injection and was
rated at 217 horsepower and 195 lb-ft of torque when new. Work in 2020
included rebuilding the brake booster and replacing the starter, shifter
bushings, brake master cylinder, battery, fluids, engine mounts, and
ignition components. A compression test performed by the selling dealer
yielded results between 155-160 psi across all six cylinders as shown in
the gallery.


Engine stamping *64K06537* pictured above matches that listed on the
Porsche Classic Technical Certificate document, confirming it as original.
A photo of the matching transmission stamping (K04253) is pictured in the
image gallery.


Power is routed to the rear wheels through a G50 five-speed manual
gearbox. According to the Carfax report, the clutch, slave cylinder, and
hose were replaced in 2017.


A composite photo showing all intact VIN tags, the VIN stamping, and the
engine and transmission number is provided above.


The window sticker indicates original delivery to Max Dial Porsche of
Inglewood, California and lists the optional equipment as well as a total
price of $70,215. A copy of the original title and purchase agreement are
provided in the image gallery.


The Porsche Classic Technical Certificate issued in April 2020 by Porsche
of North Houston, Texas shows the factory colors, options, and powertrain
numbers, as well as an overview of the function and condition of various
aspects of the vehicle.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and
displays history in Connecticut, New York, and New Jersey from its first
entry in 1992. A similarly clean AutoCheck report can be viewed below.

Filed under: g50, impact bumper, impact-bumper

