
This 1999 Porsche 911 Carrera coupe was delivered new to Pepe Performance
Cars of White Plains, New York, and was acquired by the selling dealer in
July 2020. The car is finished in metallic silver over black leather and
is powered by a 3.4-liter flat-six paired with a six-speed manual
transaxle. Equipment includes OZ Racing wheels, Eibach springs, a sunroof,
a stainless steel exhaust system, the Hi-Fi Sound Package,
power-adjustable front seats, and automatic climate control. The IMS
bearing was replaced in 2014 along with installation of a new clutch and
flywheel. This 996 indicates just under 34k miles and is offered by the
selling dealer in North Salem, New York, with a window sticker,
manufacturer's literature, service records, a clean Carfax report, and a
clean Virginia title.

34k-Mile 1999 Porsche 911 Carrera 6-Speed

The car is finished in Arctic Silver Metallic (L92U) and features an
electric sunroof, black Carrera badging, a speed-dependent rear spoiler,
and dual stainless steel exhaust outlets. A walk-around video has been
provided by the selling dealer.


Aftermarket 18'' OZ Racing wheels wear 235/40 and 265/40 Continental
ExtremeContact Sport tires that show date codes from 2016. Eibach springs
have been fitted in place of the factory components.


The cabin is trimmed in black leather with matching plastics and carpets,
the latter of which are protected by Coco Mats. Amenities include
power-adjustable front seats, a carbon fiber and aluminum-trimmed shift
knob and handbrake lever, automatic climate control, and the Hi-Fi Sound
Package with a factory CD player.


The three-spoke steering wheel frames aluminum-look instrumentation
consisting of a central tachometer and a 180-mph speedometer along with
gauges for voltage, coolant temperature, fuel level, and oil pressure. The
odometer indicates just under 34k miles. The selling dealer has provided
an engine bay and interior tour video.


The 3.4-liter flat-six produced 296 horsepower and 258 lb-ft of torque
when new. Work performed in 2014 included the installation of a
replacement IMS bearing, clutch, and flywheel, while service carried out
in August 2018 consisted of the installation of new spark plugs, coil
packs, drive belts, and cabin and engine air filters. An oil change was
performed in preparation for the sale.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a six-speed manual transaxle. A
differential fluid flush was completed in 2018. A Additional underside
photos are provided in the gallery below.


The window sticker shows factory colors and equipment as well as an
original MSRP of $73,276. Manufacturer's literature and service records
are also included in the sale.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history with three previous
owners in New York, Connecticut, and Virginia. A driving video can be
viewed below.

