
This 1959 Jaguar XK150 is an open two-seater that was imported through
Jaguar Cars of New York in November 1958 and sold to its original owner in
Ogunquit, Maine. Subsequent owners in New York State included the seller's
father, who acquired the car in 1985. An early-2000a**s refurbishment
included a repaint in its original Pearl Grey and retrimming the black
leather interior as well as overhauls of the electrical, suspension, and
braking systems. Power is from a rebuilt 3.4-liter inline-six mated to a
four-speed manual gearbox, and dual air filters and a stainless steel
exhaust system were added. This XK150 OTS is offered with a soft top
frame, spare parts, a Jaguar Heritage certificate, over 60 pages of
refurbishment records and photos, and a transferrable New York
registration.

35-Years-Owned 1959 Jaguar XK150 OTS 4-Speed

Released in 1957 as a replacement for the XK140, the XK150 featured steel
bodywork with an aluminum bonnet and was first offered as an open
two-seater in 1958. This example was reportedly painted red under previous
ownership before the body and frame were separated for refinishing in
original Pearl Grey. Pitting is noted on both front and rear chrome
bumpers as well as bubbling under the left headlamp and an abrasion
beneath the front edge of the hood.


A folding soft top frame is included but has not been fitted with a cover.
Wire knock-off wheels are painted silver and fixed to replacement splined
hubs with chrome spinners. The seller notes that the wheels are in need of
refinishing and wear wide-whitewall bias-ply tires that should be replaced
due to age. Dunlop disc brakes are fitted at all four corners, and the
calipers were resleeved and installed with new lines during the
refurbishment. The suspension features coil springs up front with leaf
springs in the rear, and was also overhauled.


The XK150 featured wider interior dimensions than the outgoing XK140 and
included roll-up windows in place of the previous side curtains. Black
upholstery covers low-backed bucket seats, and wool carpets line the
floors. A black vinyl boot covers the aft area of the cockpit. Light
corrosion is noted in the spare tire well.


A replacement four-spoke steering wheel sits in front of a padded dash
with a center instrument panel covered in white vinyl. Smiths instruments
include a tachometer, a 140-mph speedometer, and a five-digit odometer
showing 13k miles. Total mileage is unknown. The glovebox does not latch
and the blower fan has been removed, but is included with the sale.


The 3.4-liter inline-six was rebuilt by Hampton Engines, Ltd. of
Westhampton Beach, New York in July 2002. The work included boiling the
block, a .050'' overbore, machining the crankshaft, and a cylinder head
overhaul as well as replacement of the main bearings, connecting rods, and
pistons. Cylinder head stamp V4969-8 matches the Heritage Trust
certificate and reproduction vehicle identification plate. Induction is
from twin SU carburetors fitted with individual air cleaners in place of
the stock airbox, which is included in the sale. The battery was replaced
in 2019.


A stainless steel exhaust system was installed during the refurbishment,
and the manifolds were porcelain-coated. The close-ratio four-speed manual
gearbox is said to have been rebuilt and fitted with a new clutch. Other
work included replacement of the fuel tank, refurbishment of the radiator,
and installation of new electrical components.


Over 60 pages of invoices for the engine work as well as other parts and
service are pictured in the gallery below, as are photos of the bare frame
and suspension components.


The Jaguar Daimler Heritage Trust certificateA lists production details,
drivetrain and chassis numbers, and original colors. A video of the engine
starting can be viewed below.

