
This 1991 Mercedes-Benz 300SEL was originally delivered to the Benson
Motor Co. of San Antonio, Texas and spent much of its life in the state
before being acquired by the selling dealer in June 2020. Finished in
Smoke Silver Metallic over a cream beige leather interior, the car is
powered by a 3.0-liter inline-six paired with a four-speed automatic
transmission and is equipped with heated front and rear seats, an electric
sunroof, and a power-operated rear window sunshade. Maintenance in
preparation for the sale reportedly included an alignment, a state
inspection, and an oil change. Now showing 41k miles, this W126 is offered
with a window sticker, a toolkit, two keys, a VMI report, a clean Carfax
report, and a clean Pennsylvania title.

41k-Mile 1991 Mercedes-Benz 300SEL

The exterior is finished in Smoke Silver Metallic (702) accented with
Mussel Grey (7176) lower cladding. Equipment includes headlamps with
washers and wipers, a sunroof, and a power-retractable antenna. Closeup
photos of the body and trim can be viewed in the gallery below.


Factory 15'' Gullideckel wheels wear Michelin Primacy MXV4 tires. The
selling dealer reportedly performed an alignment.


The interior is trimmed in cream beige leather (265) with matching
carpets, floor mats, and lower dash plastics. Appointments include heated
front seats with orthopedic backrests and reinforced springs, heated rear
seats, automatic climate control, a factory Becker stereo, and a
power-operated rear window sunshade. The car is also equipped with cruise
control and dual front airbags.


Instrumentation includes a 160-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm tachometer, and
gauges for oil pressure, fuel economy, fuel level, and coolant
temperature. The six-digit odometer shows just under 41k miles.


The 3.0-liter M103 inline-six sends power to the rear wheels through a
four-speed automatic transmission. The selling dealer performed an oil
change.


Additional underside images can be viewed in the gallery.


The original window sticker shows delivery to the Benson Motor Co., of San
Antonio, Texas and lists the optional equipment as well as a total
suggested retail price of $61,515.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows history in Texas and Pennsylvania and
lists no accidents or other reported damage from October 1990 to July
2020. A video is included below, and a VMI report is viewable in the
gallery.

