
This 2004 BMW 330Ci convertible is finished in Orient Blue Metallic over
gray leather and powered by a 3.0-liter inline-six paired with a
five-speed automatic transmission. Equipment includes xenon headlights, a
Harman-Kardon sound system, and the Cold Weather, Premium, and Sport
packages. The car was first delivered to Faulkner BMW in Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, and reportedly remained with its original owner before being
recently acquired by the selling dealer. It now has under 4k miles, and
recent service included an oil change and an inspection. This E46
convertible is now offered in New York with factory literature, a window
sticker, a Davis report, service records, a clean Carfax report, and a
clean Pennsylvania title.

4k-Mile 2004 BMW 330Ci Convertible

The car is finished in Orient Blue Metallic (317) and features a blue soft
top. Exterior equipment includes front fog lights, adaptive xenon
headlights with washers, chrome window trim, and chrome-tipped
dual-exhaust outlets.


17'' M Double Spoke alloy wheels were included in the Sport Package and
wear Continental ContiSportContact tires measuring 225/45 up front and
245/40 out back with 2003 date codes. Additional Sport Package features
include a sport-tuned suspension, and Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) and
All-Season Traction (AST) are equipped.


The cabin features seats upholstered in gray leather with matching door
panel inserts and carpeting. The two-tone dashboard is accented by wood
trim, which extends to the door pulls and the center console. Equipment
includes power-adjustable and heated front sport seats with lumbar
support, automatic climate control, and Harman-Kardon audio system.


The multi-function steering wheel is wrapped in leather and fronts factory
instrumentation including a 155-mph speedometer and a 7k-rpm tachometer,
along with gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The digital
odometer shows just under 4k miles, and an interior overview video with
engine bay footage can be viewed here.


The 3.0-liter DOHC inline-six is equipped with double-VANOS variable valve
timing and produced 225 horsepower and 214 lb-ft of torque when new. Work
performed by the selling dealer included an oil change and a vehicle
inspection, the results of which are provided in the gallery below.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a five-speed automatic
transmission. Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery
below.


The sale includes service records, factory literature, a Davis report, two
keys, and a front license plate bracket.


The window sticker shows initial delivery to Faulkner BMW in Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, colors and equipment, and a total suggested retail price of
$49,595.


The July 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
history in Pennsylvania through its most recent entry in April 2020. The
selling dealer states that the original owner transferred the title from
their business to their personal name in 2009.

