
This 1993 Nissan Pathfinder XE was delivered new to Younker Nissan in
Renton, Washington and is powered by a 3.0-liter V6 paired with a
five-speed manual transmission and a two-speed transfer case. Now showing
54k miles, the truck is finished in Beige Pearl over gray cloth, and
equipment includes a swing-out spare tire carrier, brush guard with
driving lights, tail light guards, roof rails with a cargo carrier, and an
AM/FM cassette player. This Pathfinder is offered by the selling dealer
with factory literature, a window sticker, a clean Carfax report, and a
clean Washington title.

54k-Mile 1993 Nissan Pathfinder XE 5-Speed

The body is finished in Beige Pearl (KJ1) with black fender flares and
exterior trim. Accessories include a brush guard with driving lights, tail
light guards, step bars, a trailer hitch, roof rails with a cargo carrier,
and a rear wind deflector. A dent is noted on the passenger-side quarter
panel near the fuel filler door.


Later-model 16'' alloy wheels wear 255/65 Michelin LTX M/S2 tires that
show date codes from 2011, while a factory 15'' steel wheel is mounted to
the spare tire carrier. The brake rotors, front brake pads, and shocks
were reportedly replaced in 2018, while an alignment was carried out in
May 2020.


The interior is trimmed with gray cloth and vinyl with a matching
dashboard, door panels, and carpeting. Amenities include a factory AM/FM
cassette player and cruise control as well as power windows, locks, and
mirrors.


Instrumentation includes a 100-mph speedometer, a tachometer with a 6k-rpm
redline, and a six-digit odometer showing just under 54k miles.


The 3.0-liter VG30E V6 features multi-point fuel injection and was factory
rated at 153 horsepower with 182 lb-ft of torque. Per the Carfax report, a
September 2018 service at 52k miles included an oil change, a coolant
flush, and replacement of the spark plugs, wires, serpentine belt, fuel
filter, and radiator cap.


Power is sent to the rear or all four wheels through a five-speed manual
transmission and two-speed transfer case. Additional photos of the
underbody are provided in the gallery.


The July 2020 Carfax report indicates no accidents or other damage and
shows registration in Alaska and Washington.

