
This 1990 Ferrari Mondial T cabriolet was purchased new by the current
owner's father from Big Red Sports/Imports in Norman, Oklahoma, and has
remained in the family since. It now shows 5k miles, and the car is
finished in Rosso Corsa over beige Connolly leather and is powered by a
quad-cam 3.4-liter F119 V8 paired with a five-speed manual transaxle.
Equipment includes a limited-slip differential, a black soft top, a tan
boot cover, air conditioning, automatic seat belts, and power windows.
This Mondial T Cabriolet is offered in New York on behalf of its current
owner with service records from new, factory literature, Ferrari-branded
accessories and tool kit, a window sticker, original purchase documents, a
clean Carfax report, and a clean Minnesota title.

5k-Mile 1990 Ferrari Mondial T Cabriolet

The exterior is finished in Rosso Corsa with a black convertible top and a
tan tonneau cover. Additional equipment includes a lower front spoiler,
front fog light, and pop-up headlights, the latter of which are shown in
their raised position in the gallery below. Flaws highlighted in the
gallery below include a dent on the right-rear corner, a scrape on the
right-rear intake vent, and various scuffs, scratches, and chips.


Factory 16a*^3 wheels are wrapped in Goodyear Eagle tires that are
believed to be original to the car. Standard equipment included power
steering and adjustable suspension with two stiffness settings. Braking is
handled by four-wheel vented discs with an anti-lock system.


The cabin features seats upholstered in beige Connolly leather with
matching door panel inserts, as well as contrasting black leather covering
the upper dash and door panels. Features include a gated shifter, air
conditioning, and an LED clock, power windows, mirrors, and door locks.


The three-spoke leather-wrapped steering wheel fronts a 180-mph
speedometer and a tachometer with a 7,500-rpm redline, as well as gauges
for coolant temperature, fuel level, oil pressure, and oil temperature.
The six-digit odometer shows just under 5,300 miles.


The 3.4-liter F119 V8 features quad camshafts as well as Bosch Motronic
digital engine management and produced 300 horsepower and 238 lb-ft of
torque when new. Power is delivered to the rear wheels through a
five-speed manual transaxle and a limited-slip differential. The last
recorded service in 2004 at 4,680 miles by Lake Forest Sports Cars in
Illinois included replacing the timing belt, cam seals, O-rings, gaskets,
belts, filters, fluids, and more as detailed on the invoices below. The
current owner states the car requires service before further use.


Additional photos of the underbody, suspension, and exhaust are viewable
below.


A factory tool kit is included in the sale along with manufacturera**s
literature, Ferrari-branded accessories, period literature, a book written
by the original owner featuring the car, and service records.


The window sticker lists delivery to Cavallino Classics in Scottsdale,
Arizona, factory colors and equipment, and a total suggested retail price
of $102,250. An additional letter and bill of sale from Big Red
Sports/Imports is also provided in the gallery.


The July 2020 Carfax report lists no accidents and shows history in
Minnesota through its most recent entry in March 2017. Cold-start and
driving videos are provided below.

