
This 1969 Chevrolet Camaro was customized by Driven Rides & Rods of St.
Louis, Missouri before being purchased by the seller immediately afterward
in 2015 and shipped to its current home of California. The modified body
has been refinished in black with a red stripe over a matching interior
featuring four bucket seats with leather upholstery, Vintage Air climate
control, Dakota Digital gauges, and a Kenwood and Arc Audio sound system.
Power comes from a 6.0-liter LS2 V8 mated to a four-speed automatic
transmission equipped with a 3,600-rpm stall converter. Further
modifications include a Ford 9'' limited-slip differential with
3.73:1A gears, a four-link rear end, RideTech air suspension, Wilwood
four-wheel disc brakes, 20'' Coys wheels, and a 3'' dual exhaust system
with electric cutouts. The fluids, spark plugs, and ignition switch were
changed and additional suspension modifications carried out during the
seller's ownership. This Camaro is offered with build receipts and a
California title.

LS2-Powered 1969 Chevrolet Camaro

The body is finished in black with a single red stripe and features
recessed driving lights as well as a chin spoiler on the front valance.
Electric hide-away headlamps sit on either side of an RS grille. The door
handles were shaved and electric poppers installed in their place. A photo
in the gallery below shows cracked paint in the seam at the bottom right
corner of the rear window.


Chrome 20'' Coys wheels measure 8'' wide up front and 15'' out back, and
wear a combination of 245/30 Nitto NT555 tires made in 2014 and 29 *15.00
Mickey Thompson Sportsman S/R rubber from 2007. Four-wheel disc brakes are
comprised of four-piston Wilwood calipers overA 12'' cross-drilled rotors.
The RideTech air suspension is pressurized by a pump, tank, and valves in
the trunk, and can be manipulated using an LCD controller on the dash. The
front spindles were replaced and reinforcements added to the four-link
pivot points in 2015.


The interior houses power-adjustable black leather sportA seats split by a
custom center console, individual rear seats, and matching door panels
with aluminum inserts. Amenities include power windows, Vintage Air
heating and air conditioning, and a Kenwood CD player with Bluetooth that
is connected to an Arc Audio amplifier, component speakers, and subwoofer.


An aftermarket steering wheel is mounted to a tilting column and frames
Dakota Digital instrumentation that includes a speedometer and tachometer
as well as oil pressure and coolant temperature gauges. The digital
odometer reportedly shows 400 miles, with total chassis mileage unknown. A
RideTech control module for the air suspension system is fitted to the
left of the steering column. The ignition switch was replaced in July
2020.

