
This 1979 Porsche 911SC coupe was purchased new from Coleman Porsche-Audi
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and is said to have been kept by two owners in
the state before the seller's purchase in 1995 and a subsequent move
toA Washington. Modifications added in several stages thereafter include
backdated bodywork inA yellow and conversion for track use with 935-style
coilover suspension as well as a stripped interior with a roll cage, a
fire suppression system, and racing seats. Power is from an air-cooled
flat-six that was rebuilt at 3.5 liters in 2013 and features twin-plug
cylinder heads and PMO carburetors among other modifications. Shifting is
through a regeared five-speed manual transaxle with a limited-slip
differential. The car is registered for street use and has also been
campaigned in SCCA and IRDC road racing as well as regional hillclimb
events, with a number of poles and first-in-class finishes reported by the
seller. This 911SC track car is offered with a window sticker, owner's
books, racing logbooks, spare wheels and parts, a custom-built trailer,
and a clean Washington State title in the seller's name.

Modified 1979 Porsche 911SC 3.5L w/Trailer

The body was modified in 1999 with a backdated hood and front fenders as
well as RSR-style bumper covers and fender flares. A color change
fromA Casablanca Beige MetallicA to the current yellow was also carried
out, and Carrera side decals and an extended RSR-style whale tail spoiler
were installed. Extended exhaust resonators exit from below the rear
bumper. Other modifications include external hood and engine cover
closures, headlamp covers, quarter window cooling ducts, and jacking pads
below the rockers.A Detachable front and rear spoiler lips are included in
the sale.


The staggered-width 16'' Fuchs-style wheels shown above are joined by
another set of aftermarket wheels, with included rubber comprisingA two
front and four rear Avon super-soft slicks as well as four additional Avon
road race tires. Suspension has been converted to 935-style front and rear
coilovers, and the car will be supplied with both a dedicated race setup
and a softer version for rain or street use according to the seller.
Floating 917 brake calipers are paired with cross-drilled rotors up front
and slotted versions in the rear.


The stripped cockpit houses a bolt-in roll cage with door bars, two racing
seats with five-point harnesses, a fire suppression bottle, a Cool Shirt
system, and a brake bias adjuster.


A Momo steering wheel with a centering stripe frames VDO gauges
supplemented by a canted programmable AutoMeter tachometer. The six-digit
odometer shows 203k miles, 65k of which have been driven by the seller in
25 years. A shift light and water bottle cage are mounted to the roll bar
cross-brace, and a five-panel Wink mirror has been fitted.

