
This 1975 BMW 2002 was acquired by the seller in September 2019 from a
long-term owner who is said to have used the car for driving instruction
at BMW Car Club of America events. It is finished in Jade Green over a tan
interior, and power is provided by a modified 2.0L inline-four paired with
a later 323i-sourced close-ratio five-speed manual transmission and a
limited-slip differential. Equipment includes a sunroof, lowering springs,
Koni adjustable front struts, a front strut tower brace, 13'' basketweave
wheels, and a Behr air-conditioning system. This 2002 is now offered with
a clean Massachusetts title in the seller's name.

Modified 1975 BMW 2002 5-Speed

The body was refinished in its factory Jade Green (078) at some point
during previous ownership and features US-market impact bumpers, a sliding
sunroof, chrome side mirrors, and polished moldings. The seller notes
paint chips around the body, especially on the leading edge of the hood,
and states that the front lower valance and the spare tire well have been
patched to repair corrosion. A buckle in the metal above the left-rear
wheel is also noted. Hella 7'' headlights with LED lamps have been added.


13'' basketweave wheels were sourced from a 320i and are wrapped in 185/60
Federal Super Street 595 tires that were recently installed according to
the seller. Modifications are said to include adjustable Koni front
shocks, de-cambered front struts and front disc brakes from a 2002tii
model, front and rear lowering springs, front and rear heavy-duty sway
bars, a front strut tower brace, and rear drum brakes sourced from a 320i
model. Corrosion is noted in the area where the passenger's footwell meets
the firewall.


The interior features front bucket seats with tan aftermarket seat covers,
tan vinyl door panels and rear seat upholstery, gray carpets, and a black
dash. Equipment includes Pioneer door speakers and a non-working Behr
air-conditioning system and Sherwood cassette deck. The seller notes a
crack in the dash on the right side of the instrument pod, which can be
seen in the gallery below.


The wood-rimmed Personal steering wheel wears a MOMO horn cap and fronts a
factory woodgrain instrument cluster housing a 120-mph speedometer, an
8k-rpm tachometer, and gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The
five-digit odometer shows 28k miles, approximately 1k of which were added
by the seller. True mileage is unknown.


The 2.0-liter M10 inline-four was reportedly rebuilt during prior
ownership with a Schrick 292 camshaft and 10:1-compression pistons.
Additional equipment includes a reinforced motor bracket, a Stahl tubular
exhaust header feeding into an Ansa exhaust system, a Weber 38/38
two-barrel carburetor, and a lightweight flywheel. Other replaced items
are said to consist of the motor mounts, radiator, fan, and alternator
bushings. Power is sent to the rear wheels through a close-ratio
five-speed manual transmission with a dogleg first gear sourced from a
later-model 323i and a 3.90:1 limited-slip differential from a 320i. The
battery has been relocated to the trunk, and a battery disconnect switch
is fitted.

Filed under: bmw 02, bmw 2002

