
This 1977 Datsun 280Z was acquired in 2018 by the seller, who subsequently
commissioned Z Car Garage of San Jose, California to replace the engine
and to modify the interior, brakes, suspension, and more. The car is
powered by a Hasselgren Engineering 3.1-liter L28 inline-six paired with a
five-speed manual transmission, and the Light Blue Metallic paintwork is
complemented by a black interior that has been fitted with Recaro bucket
seats. Additional modifications include lowering the driver-side floor pan
as well as installing a nine-speaker Bluetooth-capable sound system with a
subwoofer, a security system, a reconditioned R134a air-conditioning
system, Panasport wheels, Eibach lowering springs, and disc brakes.
Approximately 3k miles have been added by the seller since completion of
the project. This S30 is now offered with the removed factory seats,
hubcaps, console, and radio as well as a $62k invoice from Z Car Garage,
factory tools, and a clean California title in the seller's name.

Modified 1977 Datsun 280Z 3.1L 5-Speed

This is a re-list after the car was withdrawn from a May 2020 BaT Auction
when a mechanical issue was discovered during a pre-sale service. Z Car
Garage subsequently installed a different camshaft with an updated
profile, and the car was tuned on a dynamometer. The seller has since
driven 800 miles for break-in and to test drivability.

The car is finished in Light Blue Metallic (305) and features side trim,
Hella H4 headlights, and chrome-finished bumpers with black guards. The
paintwork and exterior trim are shown in detail in the photo gallery
below.


Silver 16'' Panasport wheels have polished outer lips and are mounted with
225/50 Bridgestone Potenza S007A tires that show 2018 date codes. Slotted
brake rotors are paired with Z Car Garage calipers front and rear, and
receipts show that work has also been performed on the parking-brake
system. Eibach lowering springs have been installed, and other factory
suspension components have been removed and refinished.


The cabin is trimmed in black, and the driver-side floor was modified to
lower the bolstered Recaro bucket seat. The carpets and weatherstripping
have been replaced, and the air conditioning utilizes R134a refrigerant. A
nine-speaker sound system with a subwoofer has been added along with a
digital Bluetooth stereo in the factory location, and a hands-free phone
system with a remote microphone has also been installed. The console has
been replaced, and the removed factory unit will accompany the car along
with the factory radio and seats.


Instrumentation consists of a 10-to-160-mph speedometer, an 8k-rpm
tachometer, and three auxiliary gauges including an analog clock in the
center of the dashboard. The five-digit odometer shows just under 1k miles
and has rolled over since the previous listing. Approximately 3k miles
have been added by the seller since 2018.


Hasselgren Engineering provided the L28 inline-six, which now displaces
3.1 liters and utilizes the factory Bosch L-Jetronic fuel-injection
system. Work performed in 2018 at Z Car Garage totaled $62,100 and
includes the $8,800 engine with an aftermarket camshaft, labor for
installation, refinishing the engine bay, overhauling the air-conditioning
system, and more as shown in the gallery on the two-page list provided by
the seller.


Power is delivered to the rear wheels through a five-speed manual
transmission that was replaced in 2018. Receipts also show that the
flywheel was replaced and an Exedy clutch assembly was installed at that
time. Additional photos of the underside are presented in the gallery
below, and a video of the underside can be viewed here.


The removed factory seats, set of hubcaps, console, and radio will
accompany the car. Each item is depicted individually in the gallery below
along with the factory tools and other included accessories.


In-progress photos from 2018 at Z Car Garage are also provided in the
gallery.

