
This 1992 BMW R100GS is powered by a 980cc opposed twin mated to a
five-speed transmission and finished in black with yellow trim and
graphics. The bike is equipped with hard-sided Krauser panniers, a front
disc brake, a rear monoshock, hand guards, and a luggage rack as well as
modifications such as heated grips, driving lights, and adjustable
pull-back handlebar risers. The carburetors were rebuiltA in 2012, and the
oil was most recently changed in 2017. This R100GS was acquired by the
selling dealer from its second owner and shows 10k miles. It is offered at
no reserve with a factory tool kit, owner's and service manuals, partial
records, and a clean Oregon title.

No Reserve: 1992 BMW R100GS

The bike is finished in a "Bumble Bee" scheme that includes Avus Black
bodywork with a yellow rider'sA seat, fork lowers, headlight guard, and
graphics. Equipment consists of a black luggage rack and engine guard,
Krauser panniers, both center and side stands, a 12-volt accessory socket,
an adjustable windshield, a replacement headlight with a yellow guard, and
lower driving lights. Scratches and chips are noted in the paint.


Wire-spoke wheels wear Shinko Trail Master tires measuring 90/90-21 front
and 130/80-17 rear. Suspension is from a conventional fork with a
high-mounted axle and rubber gaiters as well as a monoshock mounted to a
single-sided swingarm, which doubles as a driveshaft enclosure. Braking is
from a hydraulic disc up front and a drum in the rear.


Black handlebars are mounted to adjustable pull-back risers and feature a
center cross-brace, hand guards, and aftermarket heated grips.
Instrumentation includes a 120-mph speedometer, a tachometer with a 7k-rpm
redline, and a five-digit odometer showing 10k miles. A thermometer and
voltmeter have also been added.


The air-cooled 980cc opposed twin produced 58 horsepower and 56 lb-ft of
torque when new. The engine breathes through dual 32mm constant-velocity
Bing carburetors that were rebuilt in 2012 as well as a two-into-one
exhaust system that features a box-type muffler behind the transmission
and a chrome tailpipe exiting on the left. An oil change was most recently
carried out in 2017. Power is transferred to the rear wheel through a
five-speed transmission.


A factory tool kit, owner's literature, a service manual, and partial
records are included in the sale.

