
This 1984 BMW 633CSiA was sold new by Competition & Sports Cars Limited of
Greenwich, Connecticut and acquired by the seller from the original
owner's estate in February 2020. The car is finished in black over red
leather and powered by a 3.2-liter inline-six paired with a four-speed
automatic transmission. Factory equipment includes a limited-slip
differential, 14'' wheels, a sunroof, electric windows, power-adjustable
front seats, air conditioning, and a cassette stereo. This E24 shows just
under 44k miles and is offered with original purchase documents,
manufacturer's literature, service records, a clean Carfax report, and
transferable New York registration in the sellera**s name.

No Reserve: 44k-Mile 1984 BMW 633CSi

The body is finished in Black (668) and features a sunroof, polished front
and rear bumper accents, and chrome side mirror caps. The seller notes
that a repair was made to the right quarter panel during previous
ownership. Corrosion is present in the jamb of the right fender as well as
the right quarter panel. Twelve paint-meter readings are depicted in the
photo gallery below.


Factory 14a*^3 bottlecap wheels wear 205/70 Michelin MXV4 tires. The
seller has provided twelve paint-meter readings that can be referenced in
the gallery below.


The cabin features seating surfaces upholstered in red leather with
matching door panel inserts, a contrasting black dash, and charcoal
carpets. Amenities include electric windows and locks, power-adjustable
front seats, an onboard computer, and a factory cassette player. The
volume knob for the stereo is missing, but the seller reports that a
replacement is included in the sale. Narrated videos showing the operation
of interior amenities andA functionality of the power headrestsA have been
provided.


A leather-wrapped steering wheel frames a 150-mph speedometer and a
tachometer along with gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The
six-digit odometer shows just under 44k miles, of which approximately 50
have been added by the seller.


The 3.2-liter M30 inline-six features Bosch fuel injection and was factory
rated at 181 horsepower and 195 lb-ft of torque when new. The battery was
replaced and an oil and filter change was completed in preparation for the
sale.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a ZF four-speed automatic
transmission and a limited-slip differential. Additional photos of the
underbody and suspension are viewable below.


Service records accompany the car along with manufacturer's literature and
original purchase documentation that shows a selling price of $41,317 in
October 1984.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists
emissions testing, registration, and service history in New York from May
1985 to November 2019.

