
This 2006 Ducati 999 is powered by a 998cc Testastretta desmodromic L-twin
paired with a six-speed transmission and features A*hlins suspension and
Brembo front brakes from an S model as well as a Termignoni exhaust
system. Additional modifications include adjustable shorty brake and
clutch levers, a SpeedyMoto clutch pressure plate, a carbon fiber rear
fender, Driven sprockets, a license plate relocation kit and open clutch
cover from Rizoma, a Zero Gravity windscreen, and more. A timing belt
replacement and valve clearance check were carried out in 2019. This
modified 999 was reportedly acquired by the selling dealer from the son of
its original owner and shows 15k miles. It is offered at no reserve with a
May 2016 dyno chart, two keys including a red key, removed factory
mirrors, and a clean Wisconsin title.

No Reserve: Modified 2006 Ducati 999

The bodywork and trellis frame are finished in red, and the bike is
equipped with a black passenger pillion as well as a Zero Gravity
double-bubble windscreen, NRC mirror block-off plates with LED turn
signals, a relocatedA license bracket, a carbon fiber rear fender, and a
Ducati Performance tank pad. Chips behind the left mirror mount and on the
right fairing can be viewed in the video below.


Marchesini 17'' wheels wear 120/70 front and 190/55 rear Pirelli Diablo
Rosso Corsa tires. The front and rear suspension was replaced with A*hlins
parts from a 999S model, which include a titanium nitride-treated 43mm
inverted fork and as well as a monoshock with a piggyback reservoir
mounted to the box-section rear swingarm. Braking is from dual
radial-mounted Brembo front calipers from an S model up front and a single
disc in the rear.


Clip-on handlebars wear Driven D3 grips with bar ends in addition to CRG
shorty adjustable brake and clutch levers. Instrumentation consists of a
13k-rpm Magneti-Marelli analog tachometer and a digital multi-function
display showing speed, coolant temperature, time of day, and voltage. The
odometer shows 15k miles.


The 998cc Testastretta desmodromic L-twin has been fitted with a full
Termignoni 57mm exhaust system featuring a titanium and carbon fiber
silencer. A timing belt replacement and a valve clearance check were
carried out at 12k miles in early 2019, while a general inspection has
been performed by the selling dealer.


Power is transferred to the rear wheel through a dry clutch and a
six-speed transmission. Modifications include a SpeedyMoto anodized
pressure plate with black clutch springs and a Rizoma clutch cover, while
front and rear Driven sprockets have been fitted with a DID chain.


A May 2016 dyno chart shows output of 130 horsepower at the rear wheel.
Both keys as well as the factory mirrors with built-in turn signals are
included in the sale and can be viewed in the gallery. A narrated
walk-around and start-up video can be viewed below.

