
This 1972 Datsun 510 Sedan was acquired approximately 11 years ago by the
seller, who has since installed a fuel-injected 3.0-liter VG30E V6 and a
five-speed manual transmission. The exterior was reportedly repainted a
factory shade of light green during previous ownership, and the interior
has been overhauled with a Vintage Air A/C system, factory AM/FM radio,
and reupholstered black vinyl seats and door panels. Additional
modifications include an adjustable rear crossmember, Eibach front
lowering springs, an aluminum radiator, B&M short shifter, 240Z wheels and
trim rings, 280ZX front brakes, and more as outlined below. This modified
510 sedan is now being offered at no reserve with photos from the work, an
ownera**s manual, warranty booklet, factory literature, service manuals,
and a clean California title in the sellera**s name.

No Reserve: 1972 Datsun 510 Sedan VG30E 5-Speed

The car was reportedly refinished in a factory shade of light green during
previous ownership, and features include a backdated grille, BMW E21
headlights, chrome bumpers, and side-view mirrors from a BMW 2002. A dent
on the rear panel was repaired by the seller, who notes a number of paint
cracks, blisters, peeling around the panel creases and on the rear bumper,
and other blemishes.


Silver-painted 14a** steel wheels from a Datsun 240Z wear chrome trim
rings and are wrapped in BFGoodrich Traction T/A tires sized 195/65.
Stopping power is provided by front discs with 280ZX calipers along with
rebuilt drums out back. The master cylinder has reportedly been rebuilt
and a Nissan brake booster installed. The suspension features adjustable
Tokico shocks and Eibach lowering springs up front, while an adjustable
crossmember and shortened springs are fitted in the rear. A rebuilt
steering box has reportedly been installed, along with replacement tie
rods, ball joints, sway bar bushings, and idler arms.


The interior has been reupholstered in black vinyl with metal rivets and
matching door panels. The dash pad has been replaced, Dynamat insulation
was applied to the floors, and replacement carpeting was sourced from Eddy
and Son upholstery of Bellflower, California. The glovebox cover was
signed by automotive designer Pete Brock, and additional features include
a Vintage Air A/C system, a rebuilt heater, factory AM/FM radio, and
three-point front seatbelts. The seller states that the passenger-side
door seals are in need of replacement. A video tour of the interior can be
seen here.


A black leather-wrapped three-spoke steering wheel features a horn button
from a Hakosuka Skyline and fronts instrumentation including a 120-mph
speedometer, an 8k-rpm tachometer, and a fuel level gauge. The in-dash
coolant temperature gauge is inoperable, and has been replaced by a VDO
coolant temperature gauge mounted in a pod under the dashboard along with
an analog clock and voltage gauge. the speedometer and tachometer are
reported to be inaccurate, thus total mileage is unknown.


The engine bay was repainted during current ownership and houses a
fuel-injected 3.0-liter VG30E V6 that was installed by Vildini Motorsports
of Misson Viejo, California. The timing belt, water pump, thermostat, and
seals are said to have been replaced prior to the engine swap, and the
seller notes that the A/C compressor is leaking. Additional modifications
include the following:

* Powder-coated 200SX intake manifold
* Powder-coated valve covers
* Injen air intake
* 300ZX ECU, distributor, and alternator
* CX Racing aluminum radiator with dual electric fans
* VW VR6 fuel pump
* Jet Hot-coated 200SX exhaust manifold
* Rear-mounted free-flow catalytic convertor


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a five-speed manual transmission
reportedly sourced from a 200SX and equipped with a B&M short shifter and
a shortened and balanced driveshaft from Vildini Motorsports. The clutch
and cylinders are said to have been replaced, and additional features
include a Datsport removable transmission tunnel cover and a VG five-speed
transmission crossmember.

