
This 1977 Honda CB750A is powered by a 736cc inline-four paired with a
two-speed Hondamatic semi-automatic transmission and finished in burgundy
with gold pinstripes. Features include a diamond-pleated two-up seat, a
removable kickstart lever, center and side stands, a parking brake, and an
aftermarket four-into-two exhaust system. The bike was acquired by the
selling dealer in May 2020 and subsequently fitted with new tires and a
replacement AGM battery. Additional service consisted of flushing the
front disc brake as well as adjustment of the rear brake and drive chain.
This CB750A is offered at no reserve with a tool kit and a clean Wisconsin
title.

No Reserve: 1977 Honda CB750A Hondamatic

The fuel tank and side covers are finished in dark metallic red with gold
pinstripes over chrome fenders, the front of which features a factory
flared design. Faded paint is noted on the top of the fuel tank, which
contains a locking fuel cap cover. The diamond-pleated two-up seat has
been repaired with a vinyl patch along a separated seam.


Wire wheels with shouldered rims were mounted with Challenger 100/90-19
front and Duro 120/90-17 rear tires by the selling dealer. Suspension
consists of a conventional fork and a rear swingarm mounted with dual
shocks featuring chrome covers. The front disc brake was flushed and the
rear drum adjusted in preparation for the sale. The bike is equipped with
a parking brake.


Instrumentation includes a 130-mph speedometer and a combination gauge
housing the transmission indicator, fuel gauge, and warning lights. The
five-digit odometer shows 16k miles.


The 736cc inline-four produced 47 horsepower when new and transfers power
to the rear wheel through a two-speed semi-automatic transmission and a
drive chain. The aftermarket four-into-two exhaust system has been painted
black. A general inspectionA performed by the selling dealer was followed
by a drive chain adjustment and installation of a new AGM battery.


A factory tool kit and a removable kickstart lever are included in the
sale, with the latter stowing under the seat when not in use. A narrated
walk-around and start-up video, which includes an explanation of the
transmission operation, can be viewed below.

