
This 1998 Mercedes-Benz E430 is finished in Obsidian Black over Mushroom
leather, and power is supplied by a 4.3-liter V8 mated to a five-speed
automatic transmission. Equipment includes the Sport Package, which added
17'' alloy wheels and AMG-styled body pieces, as well as front fog lights,
a power-operated sunroof, power-adjustable and heated front seats,
automatic climate control, cruise control, and an Alpine AM/FM/CD head
unit with accompanying rear-seat DVD screens. The car reportedly remained
registered with a single family in Michigan prior to its recent
acquisition by the selling dealer. It now has under 70k miles, and recent
service included an oil change and inspection. This W210 E-Class is
offered at no reserve in Illinois with factory literature, three key fobs,
the removed factory head unit, a front license plate bracket, a tool roll,
a clean Carfax report, and a clean Michigan title.

No Reserve: 1998 Mercedes-Benz E430 Sport

The car is finished in Obsidian Black (917U) and features an AMG-styled
front spoiler and side skirts. Additional features of the Sport Package
include round front fog lights and Sport badging, and the car is also
equipped a power-operated sunroof and headlight washers.


Optional 17'' five-spoke alloy wheels exclusive to the Sport Package are
wrapped in 235/45 Michelin Pilot Exalto A/S tires, and curb marks are
visible on the wheels.


The interior features seating surfaces upholstered in Mushroom leather
(205A) along with matching carpets and a two-tone dashboard and door
panels. Wood trim accents the doors, dashboard, and center console, and
the heated front seats are power-adjustable with memory functions as well
as multi-contour functions for the driver. Additional amenities include
automatic climate control, a leather-wrapped shift knob, and power windows
and locks. An aftermarket Alpine AM/FM/CD head unit has been installed and
is accompanied by rear seat DVD screens housed in the front seat
headrests; the seller notes that the removed factory head unit will
accompany the sale.


The leather-wrapped airbag steering wheel fronts factory VDO
instrumentation that includes a 160-mph speedometer, a 7k-rpm tachometer,
and auxiliary gauges. The digital odometer indicates under 70k miles,
approximately 500 of which were added by the selling dealer.


The 4.3-liter M113 V8 was factory rated at 275 horsepower and 295 lb-ft of
torque when new. The selling dealer reportedly performed an oil service
and and inspection in preparation for the sale.


Power is delivered to the rear wheels through a five-speed automatic
transmission. Additional underside photos are provided in the gallery
below.


The June 2020 Carfax report is free of accidents and other damage, and it
chronicles registration and service events in Michigan from two registered
owners

