
This 1991 Toyota Supra Twin Turbo RA was sold new in Japan and later spent
time in Nevada and Florida, where it was acquired by the father of its
current owner in 2018. Power is from a twin-turbocharged 2.5-liter 1JZ-GTE
inline-six paired with a five-speed manual transmission and a factory
limited-slip differential.A The car is finished in Jade Mica Green over
gray cloth and equipped withA 17'' Stern wheels, Recaro seats, a Momo
steering wheel, Bilstein and Tein suspension components, lightweight sway
bars, and an aftermarket exhaust system. This Supra is offered at no
reserve by the seller on behalf of its current owner with a tool kit and a
clean Florida title in the owner's name.

No Reserve: 1991 Toyota Supra Twin-Turbo R 5-Speed

The car is finished in metallic green and features a front spoiler with
brake cooling ducts and integrated fog lights. Additional features
includeA a rear wing as well asA pop-up headlights that are shown lowered
and raised. Close-up photos of scratches and chips in the paint are
provided in the gallery below.


Six-spoke 17'' Stern wheels wear Atlas Force UHP tires up front and
Bridgestone Potenza GIII rubber out back. The Twin Turbo R featured
lightweight sway barsA from the factory as well as additional suspension
components from Bilstein and Tein.


The interior is trimmed in two-tone gray cloth with matching carpets and
plastics. Equipment includes Recaro sport seats, air conditioning,
electric windows, and a factory cassette stereo.


A stockA Momo steering wheel frames a 180-km/h speedometer, a tachometer
with a 7k-rpm redline, and gauges for boost, fuel level, coolant
temperature, and voltage. The six-digit odometer shows approximately 98k
kilometers (~61k miles), less than 2k of which were added under current
ownership.


The 2.5-litre 1JZ-GTE inline-six featured two CT12A turbochargers arranged
in parallel from the factoryA and was rated at 276 horsepower and 268
lb-ft of torque when new. This example has been fitted with an aftermarket
exhaust system according to the seller.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a five-speed manual transmission
and a Torsen limited-slip differential. Additional underside images can be
viewed in the gallery.


The car is supplied with a tool kit, a jack, and two keys. A driving video
is provided below.

