
This 1989 Honda Prelude Si 4WS is finished in Frost White over black and
gray cloth and is powered by a 2.0-liter inline-four mated to a five-speed
manual transaxle. It is said to have resided with a collector in Kentucky
beginning in the early 1990s, and was moved to Arizona with the seller's
acquisition in 2016. The car is equipped with Honda's active
four-wheel-steering system, a power sunroof, a factory cassette player,
and a rear spoiler. Work in March 2020 included an engine oil change and
an R134a conversion of the air conditioning system. Now showing 35k miles,
this Prelude Si is offered at no reserve with owner's literature,
maintenance records from the seller's ownership, a clean Carfax report,
and a clean Arizona title in the seller's name.

No Reserve: 35k-Mile 1989 Honda Prelude Si 4WS 5-Speed

The exterior is finished in Frost White and features pop-up headlamps,
black belt line and bumper trim, 4WS badging, and a rear spoiler with an
integrated third brake light. A sunroof wind deflector is included but not
installed. The Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage.


Factory 14'' alloy wheels wear Mastercraft Avenger LSR tires measuring
195/60, and the braking system utilizes discs front and rear. The car is
also equipped with a four-wheel-steering system, which comprises a
shaft-driven planetary gearbox that manipulates the rear wheel toe angle
based on steering angle.


The interior is upholstered in black and gray cloth and features a center
armrest, a factory cassette stereo, Prelude-branded gray floor mats,
cruise control, and power windows and mirrors. The air conditioning was
converted to R134a in March 2020 and a leak in the system was repaired in
August 2020.


Instrumentation includes a 140-mph speedometer, an 8k-rpm tachometer, and
a six-digit odometer showing 35k miles. Approximately 4k miles were added
by the seller in four years of ownership.


The 2.0-liter B20A5 inline-four features dual overhead camshafts and
produced 135 horsepower and 127 lb-ft of torque when new. The coolant,
brake fluid, and power steering fluid were flushed and a new valve cover
gasket was installed in 2017. An oil change was performed in March 2020.
The timing belt and water pump were replaced in August of 2020 and an
engine-start video is viewable here.


Power is sent to the front wheels via a five-speed manual transaxle. A new
clutch master cylinder was installed in 2018.


Maintenance records from the seller's ownership are included in the sale.


The accident-free Carfax report shows registration history in Kentucky and
Arizona.

