
This 1970 Datsun 1600 roadster was acquired by the seller's father-in-law,
an Indiana Datsun dealer, in the 1970s as a father-daughter project and
has remained in the family through her acquisition in 1982 up to present
day. The car is said to have been driven until the late 1980s and
subsequently stored until 2005, at which point a mechanical refreshment
was carried out in order to make it roadworthy. A replacement 1.6-liter
inline-four routes power through a four-speed manual transmission, and the
car features a late-model high windshield, a black soft top, a white
hardtop, and period alloy wheels. A November 2016 service reportedly
included replacement of the cylinder head gasket and a radiator rebuild.
This SPL311 is offered at no reserve with records from 2005-2016, factory
service and ownera**s manuals,A and a clean Indiana title in the name of
the seller's wife.

No Reserve: 1970 Datsun 1600 Roadster

The Datsun Roadster was revised with a taller windshield incorporated into
the body for 1968. Originally white according to the seller, this example
was repainted its current red during the 1970s project.A The seller notes
chips and scratches around the body as well as corroded brightwork and
dry-rotted moldings and weatherstripping.


Aftermarket 14'' wheels are mounted with 175/70 Dayton Quadra SE tires. A
white hard top will accompany the car and is photographed in the gallery
below.


The interior features high-backed bucket seats upholstered in black vinyl
as well as matching plastic trim andA replacement carpets. Various vinyl
patch repairs are noted along with corrosion on the metal surfaces and
filled splits in the dash.


Instrumentation includes a tachometer, a speedometer, and a five-digit
odometer showing 81k miles, with total mileage unknown. The tachometer is
said to bounce between 5-6k rpm and theA clock is inoperable.


The replacement 1.6-liter inline-four was installed in the 1970s according
to the seller. A 2005 mechanical refreshment was carried out by Whetsel's
Automotive Inc. in Greenfield, Indiana as detailed on a receipt in
theA gallery. TheA carburetor float holder was replaced in 2014, while
work in 2016 reportedly included replacement of the cylinder head gasket
and a radiator rebuild due to an overheating issue. The seller notes
periodic leakage from the coolant overflow tank.


Power is sent to the rear wheels through a four-speed manual transmission.
Additional underbody photographs are provided in the gallery. A video that
shows the engine running as well as a test drive demonstration can be seen

