
This 1989 Toyota Tercel coupe is finished in white over a blue and gray
interior and powered by a carbureted 1.5L inline-four mated to a
three-speed automatic transmission. The car is said to have been purchased
new from Broadway Toyota of Portland and remained with a single family in
Oregon until December 2019 when it was acquired by the seller. Features
include a heated rear window, power steering, air conditioning, and a Sony
CD/Bluetooth head unit. This L30 shows 108k miles and is offered at no
reserve with an owner's manual, accident-free Carfax and AutoCheck
reports, and a clean Oregon title in the seller's name.

No Reserve: 1989 Toyota Tercel Coupe5

The car is finished in White (041) and features black side moldings and
bumpers.A  A series of dents and scrapes are visible on the left quarter
panel near the fuel filler door and an additional dent can be seen on the
right door.

No Reserve: 1989 Toyota Tercel Coupe

Factory 13'' steel wheels wear discolored plastic covers and Toyo tires.
Power steering was equipped from the factory.


The interior is trimmed in blue vinyl with matching carpets and gray cloth
inserts on the seats and door panels. Amenities include a heated rear
window, air conditioning, and a Sony CD/Bluetooth head unit. Wrinkling can
be seen in the headliner, discoloration is shown on the door panel
armrests, and a crack is visible in gear lever indicator cover.


Instrumentation consists of a 115-mph speedometer, a quartz clock, and
gauges for fuel level and coolant temperature. The six-digit odometer
shows 108k miles, of which approximately 150 have been added by the
seller.


The 1.5-liter 3E DOHC 12-valve inline-four utilizes a variable-venturi
single barrel carburetor and was factory-rated at 78 horsepower. An oil
and filter change was performed shortly after the seller's acquisition in
December 2019.


Power is sent to the front wheels through a three-speed automatic
transmission with overdrive. Additional underside photos are provided in
the gallery.


The April 2020 Carfax report is free of accidents and other damage and
chronicles emissions testing, service, and registration events in Oregon.
An unaddressed recall for the headlamp bulbs is noted in July 1992. An
Autocheck report from July 2020 can be viewed in the gallery below. The
video below shows a cold-start and a walk-around.

