
This 1982 Mercedes-Benz 300TD Turbo is finished in Light Ivory over a
Palomino MB-Tex interior and is powered by a 3.0-liter turbodiesel
inline-five paired with a four-speed automatic transmission. Additional
features include a sunroof, automatic climate control, power windows and
locks, and Becker stereo, and modifications include an EGR delete, R134a
air conditioning, and a hitch receiver. The car reportedly remained with
the family of its original owner in Florida before it was acquired by the
seller in 2016. Maintenance performed within the last two years included
replacement of the air-conditioning compressor and repair of an air
conditioning hose. This W123 wagon is now offered at no reserve with a
clean Carfax report and a clean Florida title in the sellera**s name.

No Reserve: 1982 Mercedes-Benz 300TD Turbo

The car is finished in Light Ivory (623H) and features US-spec bumpers and
lighting, a sunroof, and chrome roof rails. The seller notes evidence that
the roof and hood were repainted during previous ownership. Worn paint,
rust, body dings, brittle window seals, cracked headlight bezels, and an
inoperable fog light are noted. Images of exterior flaws are viewable in
the photo gallery below.


Factory 14a** Bundt wheels wear three 195/70 Goodyear Viva tires with date
codes from 2014 and one Michelin Harmony tire. The power antenna does not
work.


The cabin is trimmed in Palomino MB-Tex with color-matched door panels and
Zebrano wood trim. Amenities include electric windows, automatic climate
control, and a Becker stereo. Cracks are visible in the interior wood
trim, dashboard, and driver's door pocket. The vinyl door trim and door
cards are weathered, and the door lacing is deteriorated. The vehicle is
also missing the front floor mats. The seller notes the driver's seat
bottom padding sags and the rear passenger-side seatback shows damage.
Rust holes below the driver's seat have reportedly been repaired.


Instrumentation consists of a speedometer, a tachometer, auxiliary gauges,
and an analog clock. The six-digit odometer is stopped at 94k miles, and
the seller estimates adding 7k miles. True mileage is unknown. The cruise
control, and central door lock switch are inoperable, and the fan control
only operates at full speed. The tachometer works intermittently.


Power is from a 3.0-liter OM617 turbodiesel inline-five. Recent
maintenance is said to have included replacement of the air-conditioning
compressor and a repair to an air-conditioning hose. The air-conditioning
system has reportedly been converted to R134a refrigerant. Corrosion is
visible around the battery tray.


Power is routed to the rear wheels through a four-speed automatic
transmission. Additional images of the underside can be viewed in the
gallery below.


The August 2020 Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and
history in New York and Florida between 1995 and 2020.

Filed under: w123

