
This 2019 Jeep Grand Cherokee SRT is finished in Billet Silver Metallic
over black leather, and it was purchased by the current owner in November
2019 and subsequently modified. A ProCharger supercharger kit and an
intercooler were fitted to the 6.4-liter V8, headers and an aftermarket
dual exhaust were installed, and the suspension was lowered. Power is sent
to all four wheels through an eight-speed automatic transmission, and
additional features include 20'' wheels, automatic climate control, a
Harman Kardon stereo, heated and power-adjustable front seats, heated rear
seats, and acoustic laminated glass windows. This Grand Cherokee SRT is
now offered on dealer consignment in Oregon with removed factory parts,
service records, factory literature, a clean Carfax report, and a clean
Illinois title.

Supercharged 2019 Jeep Grand Cherokee SRT

The Grand Cherokee SRT was equipped with blacked-out trim, a unique front
bumper with cooling ducts, and body-color fender extensions and rocker
cladding. This example is finished in Billet Silver Metallic, and the
selling dealer states that a ceramic coating was applied to the paint and
paint protection film is applied to the forward-facing surfaces. Close-up
photos of the paint, trim, and lenses can be viewed in the gallery.


Black-finished 20'' wheels feature SRT center caps and wear 295/45 Pirelli
Scorpion Verde tires. The suspension is modified with lowering spring, and
braking is from red-finished Brembo calipers and vented discs at all four
corners.


The interior features seats upholstered in black leather, carbon-fiber
trim on the dashboard and door panels, and aluminum accents on the center
console and dashboard vents. Amenities include Selec-Track with launch
control, climate-controlled and power-adjustable front seats, heated rear
seats, a heated steering wheel, multi-zone climate control, Uconnect
infotainment with navigation, and a Harman Kardon sound system.


Instrumentation consists of a central 7'' multi-function display flanked
by a 180-mph speedometer and gauges for coolant temperature and fuel
level. The digital odometer shows under 22k miles.


The 6.4-liter Hemi V8 is equipped with aftermarket exhaust headers and a
ProCharger supercharger kit. The kit is said to add 215 horsepower and
includes a self-contained P-1SC-1 supercharger, an intercooler,
higher-flow injectors, a revised ECU tune, and an air intake.


Power is routed to the rear or all four wheels through an eight-speed
automatic transmission and Jeep's Quadra-Trac four-wheel-drive system
which features a limited-slip rear differential and a single-speed
transfer case. The aftermarket stainless steel dual exhaust system is
depicted above.


The August 2020 Carfax report indicates no accidents or other damage and
shows registration history in Illinois through its most recent entry in
March 2020. A driving clip can be viewed below.

