Chef and author, Susan Herrmann Loomis, wrote her first book, On Rue Tatin, about this house located at Number 1 rue Tatin in the Normandy town of Louviers. We filmed a House Hunters International in this house in our early years of filming the shows.

The New York Times wrote about it in 2009.

This is a very special house that is a landmark in the village and beyond…

Susan has hosted many dinners in its beautiful dining room—some of which I have had the privilege to participate in—not to mention various cooking demonstrations in the professional kitchen. We learned how to make her famous “Tarte Tatin” and other French specialties.

Exploring The House is like taking a tour of life over the centuries, with all its nooks and crannies, stairways and surprises. You can easily be transported through time as you wander through the House and feel all the lives who have passed through its doors.

Just across the street is the Collégiale Notre Dame de Louviers. It’s a cathedral although not the parish seat, built between the 11th and 12th centuries, and newly restored in 2021 and 2022. The façade facing The House is pristine, the gargoyles intact, with the saints looking out with beneficence.

The foundation for part of The House was built in the 11th-century, as the church was being constructed. The rest was built between the 15th and 17th centuries. It was a convent for about 300 years—the Sisters of Mercy—who began as a group of women wanting to do good works. The nuns had a vegetable garden in the front yard and interestingly enough, the cellar in The House may be part of a series of tunnels that emanate from the church, and may have been built in the 14th-century, when the English took over the city. But these are only tales that have been told and heard.

Fast forward to the 1600’s and The House, which had been expanded with the addition of two newer parts, became a convent until the late 1970’s—when it was purchased by a family—then left to sit vacant for twenty years until Susan and her husband came along. They purchased The House in 1993 and lovingly restored it. They sculpted the small “cures” or priest’s garden out front, and made it a family home and cooking school with a warm, inviting professional kitchen, beamed-ceiling dining room, and two fireplaces for atmosphere and warmth. The House has held its charms all these years, its sense of peace imbibed from the nuns, and from a warm and loving family who have enjoyed it many years.

