Although amber and lodestone were known to the ancient Greeks, elec- 
trodynamics developed as a quantitative subject in less than a hundred years. 
Cavendish's remarkable experiments in electrostatics were done from 1771 to 
1773. Coulomb's monumental researches began to be published in 1785. This 
marked the beginning of quantitative research in electricity and magnetism on a 
worldwide scale. Fifty years later Faraday was studying the effects of time- 
varying currents and magnetic fields. By 1864 Maxwell had published his famous 
paper on a dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field. 

The story of the development of our understanding of electricity and 
magnetism and of light is, of course, much longer and richer than the mention of 
a few names from one century would indicate. For a detailed account of the 
fascinating history, the reader should consult the authoritative volumes by 
Whittaker A briefer account, with emphasis on optical phenomena, appears at 
the beginning of Born and Wolf. 

This book is self-contained in that, though some mathematical background 
(vector calculus, differential equations) is assumed, the subject of elec- 
trodynamics is developed from its beginnings in electrostatics. Most readers are 
not coming to the subject for the first time, however. The purpose of this 
introduction is therefore not to set the stage for a discussion of Coulomb's law 
and other basics, but rather to present a review and a survey of classical 
electromagnetism. Questions such as the current accuracy of the inverse square 
law of force (mass of the photon), the limits of validity of the principle of linear 
superposition, the effects of discreteness of charge and of energy differences are 
discussed. "Bread and butter" topics such as the boundary conditions for 
macroscopic fields at surfaces between different media and at conductors are 
also treated. The aim is to set classical electromagnetism in context, to indicate 
its domain of validity, and to elucidate some of the idealizations that it contains. 
Some results from later in the book and some nonclassical ideas are used in the 
course of the discussion. Certainly a reader beginning electromagnetism for the 
first time will not follow all the arguments or see their significance. It is intended, 
however, that for others this introduction will serve as a springboard into the 
later parts of the book, beyond Chapter 5, as well as a reminder of how the 
subject stands as an experimental science.

