When the Danish architect Signe Bindslev Henriksen first visited Porto a decade ago, she was struck by its neglected grace. Touring late-19th-century houses, she noted the high ceilings, inlaid wood floors and carved moldings, all of which were beginning to buckle. “It felt like there had been a past that was so much more beautiful and vibrant,” Bindslev Henriksen says. That past is now the present: In short order, Portugal’s second-largest city has transformed from a quiet, industrious town into a lively creative hub. It is flush with concept shops and casual fine-dining restaurants. Young winemakers and sommeliers are bringing a fresh perspective to old vineyards. Expats are returning home to be part of the revival. Attribute some of it to the costs and crowds in other European destinations. But chefs and designers are also drawn to the innate charms of the city, whose roots go back thousands of years. The settlement on the Douro River near the Atlantic Ocean became an important port for the Romans, who dubbed it Portus Cale and are believed to have made wine along the riverbanks. The centuries brought other conquerors, including the Visigoths, the Spanish, the Moors and the French, and a wide range of architectural styles. The city’s historic center is a collection of medieval, Baroque, Gothic, and neo-Classical buildings, many with a through-line of local granite that continues into the present day.

These different styles contribute to Porto’s inspiring “unorganized organization,” as the chef Nuno Mendes puts it. “You walk through the streets and you see five, six generations of architecture piled together,” he says. “There are tiles everywhere, cobblestones everywhere.” Porto is also in the industrial heart of the country; shoes, hats, textiles, cork, furniture and ceramics have all been made in the surrounding area. Perhaps as a result, the city values both artistry and practicality, progress and preservation. The Serralves Museum of Contemporary Art, which opened in 1999, is still a force in the contemporary art scene. Meanwhile, you can find small shops in neighborhoods like Ribeira and Cedofeita that are stubbornly old-fashioned, dedicated to brooms, hats or analog cameras. But maybe the appeal is very simple. As the New York-based wine educator and consultant Nicole Muscari, who recently bought an apartment in Porto with her stylist husband, said, “Creative types like being around beautiful things.”
