You’ll very likely hear many other languages than just Portuguese these days in the hilly, sun-warmed streets of Lisbon, Portugal’s capital, as millions pour in as digital nomads, service-industry workers, home buyers and tourists. For travelers, especially in the summer, this popularity can mean long lines to enter the Castelo de São Jorge or to enjoy a pastry from Pastéis de Belém, which can (almost) diminish the charm of the city’s colorful-tile-wrapped facades, centuries-old churches and melancholy fado music. Lisbon, once a slow-paced maritime city, is in development overdrive, which has not been without discontent: The cost of living has skyrocketed, leading to public debate (and protests) about the city’s future and to the cancellation of the “golden visa” program, which granted residency to foreigners who invested in high-value properties. Visiting Lisbon thus involves a delicate balance: enjoying one of Europe’s most dynamic cities while being sensitive to the challenges that have accompanied its rapid boom.

The Lisbon of yesterday and today sit elbow to elbow in a sloping street called the Rua de São Bento. Climbing it from the intersection with Calçada da Estrela, you pass dusty antique shops, the Portuguese Parliament and the Casa-Museu Amália Rodrigues — a museum that bears the name of the Portuguese fado diva that it is devoted to — interspersed with establishments from the new creative class. Check out the (mostly) single-color fashions of the French-owned Homecore boutique, where you could pick up an outfit comprising purple jeans, a green military vest and tortoiseshell glasses. Farther up, the Sokyo Lisbon gallery specializes in melted-looking vases and meteorite-like sculptures by Japanese ceramists, while the Distopia bookshop sells two essential English-language guides dedicated to the city’s history — “Soul of Lisbon” and “Secret Lisbon” — along with vinyl albums, CDs and more.

Now head higher. The hilltop viewpoint at the Miradouro da Senhora do Monte, overlooks an undulating sprawl of orange-tiled roofs, church towers and stony squares with the medieval crenellated battlements of the Castelo de São Jorge and the blue Tagus River in the distance. But the marquee attraction is the sunset. A caipirinha (€7.50) from the Maria Limão stand enhances the feel-good, garden-party vibe as twilight approaches.

In a city awash in restaurants dishing out copious piles of pork, chicken and sardines, light bites and meatless meals used to be hard to find. Not anymore. Several ambitious vegetarian restaurants have sprouted in recent years, perhaps none more quietly elegant than Arkhe, near the Cais do Sodré district. Potted plants and a tall banana tree adorn the airy, high-ceilinged space. The menu is also filled with plants: kaleidoscopic and artful vegetarian dishes by the chef João Ricardo Alves. One appetizer presents multiple preparations of red beet (chunky, pickled, crispy dried) served with a delicate dashi- and beet-infused broth, while a kimchi tortellini with carrot purée and Indonesian chile paste is tangy, fermented and fiery. Five courses, without drinks, €70 per person.

