My life, like yours, I suspect, can feel like it has been ingeniously designed for the sole purpose of strangling serendipity. Work days are built around back-to-back meetings and video calls; evenings revolve around children’s bedtimes; date nights have to be scheduled weeks in advance; even phone calls to catch up with friends can take multiple rounds of back-and-forth coordination by text.

I have found a secret antidote to all that structure, a magic portal that has no clock or key. It is a neighborhood stoop, or rather, the discarded books that gather there. For you, maybe that translates into a bargain bin or a giveaway pile; wherever you can find books that are weathered, dog-eared and inscribed to someone else. They call out to me like porch lights to a bug.

Why do I love other people’s books? Because they carry no obligation and no expectations, unlike that novel weighing down my night stand, from a friend who insisted that I love it. Or that other one, that won an award I should care about. Or the one I’ve been halfway through for a year. If you’re not on guard, your free time can easily become someone else’s.

Found books, meanwhile, are blissfully dislocated from any hint of duty or “discourse.” They are deserted islands. Population: one.

On a recent Sunday afternoon, I purchased two well-reviewed books that had long been on my reading list. That evening, while walking the dog, I found a Saul Bellow novel from 1982 sitting on a stoop. I had never heard of it, and the cover had an unappetizing illustration of a bald man’s forehead, but I scooped up “The Dean’s December” like I had won the lottery. Later that night, as I stayed up reading Bellow on communist Romania (why not!), I beamed while my carefully considered new purchases lay untouched in my bag.

I delighted in each yellowed sentence: “The meat tasted of fire and suggested sacrifice. It carried a creaturely flavor; the smell of the stall, of the hide, was still there, and he had to suppress the unwanted feeling of animal intimacy that it gave him.”

So great! Isn’t it? Or am I too smitten to see straight? Am I predetermined to love stoop books inordinately because of my gratitude for the kismet? Did Ann Beattie write one of the greatest novels of all time in 1976, or do I love “Chilly Scenes of Winter” because I found it by a fireplace in an old ski house? Is Vikram Chandra’s Indian gangster epic the richest thriller ever conceived, or do I adore “Sacred Games” because I discovered it in someone else’s guest room?

My quest for gems hidden in plain sight makes me slow down as I walk the dog at night, exploring ordinary blocks that might otherwise pass in a blur. It has sparked my curiosity — a Spanish translation of Nicholas Nickleby? Huh! — and reliably rewarded me for it.

Serendipity can be hard to summon, but when you manage to find it — on a stoop or anywhere else — pause to appreciate the alchemy taking place: humdrum artifacts start to glow, as the dutiful melts away.
