This 2014 Porsche 911 Targa 4S was sold new by Porsche of Huntington in New York, moved to California in 2017, and now has 20k miles. It is powered by a 3.8-liter flat-six that drives all four wheels through a seven-speed PDK dual-clutch transaxle and is finished in Agate Grey Metallic over black leather. Equipment includes The Sport Chrono and Premium Packages, a black targa top, 20″ alloy wheels, a limited-slip rear differential, Porsche Torque Vectoring, bi-xenon headlights, heated power-adjustable sport seats, dual-zone automatic climate control, and Porsche Communication Management infotainment linked to a Bose sound system. The current owner acquired the car in 2021 and service in August of 2023 included replacing the engine air filter, cabin filter, and spark plugs, flushing the brake fluid, and changing the oil. This 991.1 Targa 4S is offered on dealer consignment with a window sticker, service records, the owner’s manual, a clean Carfax report, and a clean California title.

The car is finished in Agate Grey Metallic and features a power-retractable black targa top that stows under the rear glass. Additional equipment includes bi-xenon headlights with the Porsche Dynamic Light System (PDLS) as well as LED taillights, a speed-activated rear spoiler, and black rear badges. Matte paint protection film stripes are applied to the front hood and rear decklid, and the engine cover louvers were refinished in black.

The 20″ Carrera Classic alloy wheels are mounted with 245/35 front and 305/30 rear Pirelli P-zero tires with 2017 and 2021 date codes, respectively. Porsche Active Suspension Management (PASM) was standard on 4S models, and braking is handled by red-painted Porsche-branded calipers over cross-drilled and ventilated discs. The brake fluid was flushed in 2023.

The heated 14-way power-adjustable front sport seats and split-folding individual rear seats are upholstered in black leather. Appointments include dual-zone automatic climate control, Porsche Communication Management, and a CD stereo linked to a Bose sound system. The cabin air filter was replaced in August 2023.

The heated leather-wrapped steering wheel features integrated shifter controls and frames a central tachometer with a 7,600-rpm redline as well as a 200-mph speedometer and gauges for oil temperature, oil pressure, coolant temperature, and fuel level. The Sport Chrono package added a stopwatch atop the dashboard. The digital odometer indicates 20k miles, approximately 3k of which were added under current ownership.

The 3.8-liter flat-six was factory rated at 400 horsepower and 325 lb-ft of torque. Service in August 2023 included replacing the air filter and spark plugs and changing the oil.

Power is sent to all four wheels through a seven-speed PDK dual-clutch transaxle and Porsche Torque Vectoring with an electronic limited-slip rear differential. A factory sport exhaust system is fitted.

The Carfax report shows no accidents or other damage and lists history in New York and California.

