The Talking Heads were heading for breakup after their release of the tour to support their third album Fear Of Music was released. The band, especially the rhythm section of Chris Franz and Tina Weymouth, were tired of feeling like they were David Bryne’s backing band. They decided to go on an extended vacation to the Caribbean to ponder the future of their marriage and if they wanted to continue being in the band. While there they  were inspired by the african culture of the island. Especially with afro percussion. The band reformed at an apartment the couple purchased and began jamming, structuring  songs around  rhythms rather than multiple chords. Producer Brian Eno soon came on board after hearing the demos. He was reluctant  to record with the band again after producing their last two albums but was intrigued with the direction the band was heading towards. The result was this gloriously weird record. 

The album opens with “Born With Punches (The Heat Goes On)” which mixes that african influence with the band’s new wave sound. It has this funky bass line that acts as the foundation of the whole track. Like the most songs on the album it doesn’t follow a cohesive structure. It feels more like a jam than an actual song. “Crosseyed And Painless” has more of the sound the band had perfected on previous albums. Yet it still has this funky afrocentric vibe. “The Great Curve” has some great African influenced percussion. The band does a great job of mixing that sound with their rock grooves. It melts together so perfectly. “Once In A Lifetime” is the most well known song from the album and it is one of the band’s biggest songs as well. It has this swirling instrumentation mixed with afro-funk and new wave to create this swirling groove. It almost feels like you are floating above the clouds while listening to this track. It has some of the best David Byrne lyrics. Just the imagery of the words matches the sweeping sound. It has such a unique sound that makes it stand out. “Houses Of Motion” takes some inspiration from a new genre developing at that time called hip hop. From another great bassline to David Brynes’s spoken word delivery. “Seen and Not Seen” also has some instrumentation that could be inspired by hip hop. I love the electronic instrumentation of the track. David Bryne again delivers his vocals in spoken word.  “Listening Winds” has this musical African beat that begins the track. Bryne’s vocals sound like his chanting a voodoo sermon. There is a darkness and a stillness to the instrumentation of the closing track “The Overload” it just sounds so chilling like you are entering a dark realm. It’s cold and hollow and it’s my favorite track on the album. It sounds closer to a joy division song than a talking head track. 

I might have been young and naive but I never got this album when I first heard it. During this deep dive of the record makes me appreciate its greatness. It just has so much texture that it begs to be analyzed and dissected. Definitely deserves to be on your bucket list if you have never heard it before. If is a classic and deserves five out of five stars.
