Sometimes just reading the news here at PTA gets me into trouble. Like last March, when I happened upon a blurb about Zu Audio’s Dirty Weekend event, where a stripped down version of the company’s popular budget floorstander, the Omen, is offered at a ridiculously low price to entice folks interested in the Zu speaker line through the door.

OK, I’m a sucker, and I took the bait.

Not that I really needed to be enticed, as I’d spent a good bit of time with Zu’s more sophisticated and upscale Druid, Mark V model. While I ultimately decided that the Druid wasn’t exactly my cup of tea (review here), it did enough to fascinate and enthrall me that I wanted to further explore some of Zu’s other speaker offerings. Where better to start than with their least expensive floor-standing model? I thought on it for a day or two and finally shot off an email to Zu’s Gerrit Koer asking to be put on the list. It all seemed almost too good to be true: a pair from this batch in a natural maple finish would run me $950 plus shipping; the “regular” Omen (Version II) goes for $2250 for a pair. Sure, the Dirty Weekend model isn’t quite a full-fledged Omen, but it gets pretty close from a parts and performance perspective. As in same cabinets, same drivers, and basically the same innards (OK, you get Clarity Caps and fancy internal wiring with the “real” Omen…). From the moment I placed my order with Gerrit, I was regularly updated on the progress of construction and break-in by various members of the Zu Crew, which I found to be a nice customer service touch. The only thing that really sucked about the experience was the time it took to get my speakers: roughly three months from the time of purchase. Interestingly, though, much of that time was taken for running the drivers in, which apparently takes a long time, as in 600 hours or more. In the end, I appreciated that Zu does this for its customers, as the speakers sounded really good right out of the box.

So, what did I get for my $950? In short, a hell of a lot. I really didn’t think these would end up being keepers, as Zu offers a very liberal return policy. Keep ‘em two months, and if they’re not up to snuff, send ‘em back on Zu’s dime, no questions asked, for a full refund (minus initial shipping to the customer). I figured for the $80 it took to get them to me I’d have a lot of fun, maybe write-up a short review, and pass ‘em on. Well, almost two months in, I can tell you that’s not going to happen! These puppies are staying. In fact, I’ve had a really hard time pulling myself away from them, or even wanting to hook up my “better” speakers. These Zu Dirty Weekenders are just so fun and engaging!
