   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                             Cluster Overview Page

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   The Cluster Overview page of the Admin UI displays key metrics about your
   cluster and individual nodes. These include:

     * Liveness status
     * Replication status
     * Uptime
     * Hardware usage

   If you have an enterprise license, you can enable the Node Map view for a
   visual representation of your cluster's geographic layout.

   Tip:

   Enter your email in the banner at the top to receive updates on
   CockroachDB releases.

Cluster Overview panel

   Use the Cluster Overview panel to quickly assess the capacity and health
   of your cluster.

   CockroachDB Admin UI cluster overview

   Metric             Description                                             
                        * Used: The total disk space in use by CockroachDB    
                          data across all nodes. This excludes the disk space 
                          used by the Cockroach binary, operating system, and 
                          other system files.                                 
   Capacity Usage       * Usable: The total disk space usable by CockroachDB  
                          data across all nodes. This cannot exceed the store 
                          size, if one has been set using --store.            
                      See Capacity metrics for details on how these values    
                      are calculated.                                         
                        * The number of LIVE nodes in the cluster.            
                        * The number of SUSPECT nodes in the cluster. A node  
   Node Status            is considered suspect if its liveness status is     
                          unavailable or the node is in the process of        
                          decommissioning.                                    
                        * The number of DEAD nodes in the cluster.            
                        * The total number of ranges in the cluster.          
                        * The number of under-replicated ranges in the        
   Replication Status     cluster. A non-zero number indicates an unstable    
                          cluster.                                            
                        * The number of unavailable ranges in the cluster. A  
                          non-zero number indicates an unstable cluster.      

  Capacity metrics

   The Cluster Overview, Node List, and Node Map display Capacity Usage by
   the CockroachDB store (the directory on each node where CockroachDB reads
   and writes its data) as a percentage of the disk space that is usable on
   the cluster, locality, or node.

   Usable disk space is constrained by the following:

     * The maximum store size, which may be specified using the --store flag
       when starting nodes. If no store size has been explicitly set, the
       actual disk capacity is used as the limit. This value is displayed on
       the Capacity graph in the Storage dashboard.
     * Any disk space occupied by non-CockroachDB data. This may include the
       operating system and other system files, as well as the Cockroach
       binary itself.

   The Admin UI thus calculates usable disk space as the sum of empty disk
   space, up to the value of the maximum store size, and disk space that is
   already being used by CockroachDB data.

   Note:

   If you are testing your deployment locally with multiple CockroachDB nodes
   running on a single machine (this is not recommended in production), you
   must explicitly set the store size per node in order to display the
   correct capacity. Otherwise, the machine's actual disk capacity will be
   counted as a separate store for each node, thus inflating the computed
   capacity.

Node List

   The Node List groups nodes by locality. The lowest-level locality tier is
   used to organize the Node List. Hover over a locality to see all
   localities for the group of nodes.

   Tip:

   We recommend defining --locality flags when starting nodes. CockroachDB
   uses locality to distribute replicas and mitigate network latency.
   Locality is also a prerequisite for enabling the Node Map.

  Node status

   Each locality and node is displayed with its current operational status.

   Locality Status Description                                                
   LIVE            All nodes in the locality are live.                        
   WARNING         Locality has 1 or more SUSPECT, DECOMMISSIONING, or DEAD   
                   nodes (red indicates a dead node).                         

   Node Status     Description                                                
   LIVE            Node is online and updating its liveness record.           
   SUSPECT         Node has an unavailable liveness status.                   
   DECOMMISSIONING Node is in the process of decommissioning.                 
   DECOMMISSIONED  Node has completed decommissioning, has been stopped, and  
                   has not updated its liveness record for 5 minutes.         
   DEAD            Node has not updated its liveness record for 5 minutes.    

   Note:

   Nodes are considered dead once they have not updated their liveness record
   for a certain amount of time (5 minutes by default). At this point, the
   automated repair process starts, wherein CockroachDB rebalances replicas
   from dead nodes to live nodes, using the unaffected replicas as sources.

  Node details

   The following details are also shown.

   CockroachDB Admin UI node list

   Column         Description                                                 
   Node Count     Number of nodes in the locality.                            
                  Nodes are grouped by locality and displayed with their      
   Nodes          address and node ID (the ID is the number that is prepended 
                  by n). Click the address to view node statistics. Hover     
                  over a row and click Logs to see the node's log.            
   Uptime         Amount of time the node has been running.                   
   Replicas       Number of replicas on the node or in the locality.          
   Capacity Usage Percentage of usable disk space occupied by CockroachDB     
                  data on the node or in the locality. See Capacity metrics.  
   Memory Usage   Memory used by CockroachDB as a percentage of the total     
                  memory on the node or in the locality.                      
   CPUs           Number of vCPUs on the machine.                             
   Version        Build tag of the CockroachDB version installed on the node. 

  Decommissioned Nodes

   Nodes that have been decommissioned will be listed in the table of
   Recently Decommissioned Nodes, indicating that they are removed from the
   cluster. You can see the full history of decommissioned nodes by clicking
   "View all decommissioned nodes".

   CockroachDB Admin UI node list

   Note:

   When you initiate the decommissioning process on a node, CockroachDB
   transfers all range replicas and range leases off the node so that it can
   be safely shut down.

Node Map (Enterprise)

   The Node Map is an enterprise feature that visualizes the geographical
   configuration of your cluster. It requires that --locality flags have been
   defined for your nodes.

   For guidance on enabling and configuring the node map, see Enable the Node
   Map.

   CockroachDB Admin UI Summary Panel

   The Node Map uses the longitude and latitude of each locality to position
   the components on the map. The map is populated with locality components
   and node components.

  Locality component

   A locality component represents capacity, CPU, and QPS metrics for a given
   locality.

   The map shows the components for the highest-level locality tier (e.g.,
   region). You can click on the Node Count of a locality component to view
   any lower-level localities (e.g., availability zone).

   For details on how Capacity Usage is calculated, see Capacity metrics.

   CockroachDB Admin UI Summary Panel

   Note:

   On multi-core systems, the displayed CPU usage can be greater than 100%.
   Full utilization of 1 core is considered as 100% CPU usage. If you have n
   cores, then CPU usage can range from 0% (indicating an idle system) to (n
   * 100)% (indicating full utilization).

  Node component

   A node component represents capacity, CPU, and QPS metrics for a given
   node.

   Node components are accessed by clicking on the Node Count of the
   lowest-level locality component.

   For details on how Capacity Usage is calculated, see Capacity metrics.

   CockroachDB Admin UI Summary Panel

   Note:

   On multi-core systems, the displayed CPU usage can be greater than 100%.
   Full utilization of 1 core is considered as 100% CPU usage. If you have n
   cores, then CPU usage can range from 0% (indicating an idle system) to (n
   * 100)% (indicating full utilization).

See also

     * Production Checklist
     * Locality
     * Troubleshooting Overview
     * Support Resources
     * Raw Status Endpoints

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
