   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                             Replication Dashboard

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   The Replication dashboard in the CockroachDB Admin UI enables you to
   monitor the replication metrics for your cluster.

   To view this dashboard, access the Admin UI, click Metrics in the
   left-hand navigation, and select Dashboard > Replication.

Review of CockroachDB terminology

     * Range: CockroachDB stores all user data and almost all system data in
       a giant sorted map of key-value pairs. This keyspace is divided into
       "ranges", contiguous chunks of the keyspace, so that every key can
       always be found in a single range.
     * Range Replica: CockroachDB replicates each range (3 times by default)
       and stores each replica on a different node.
     * Range Lease: For each range, one of the replicas holds the "range
       lease". This replica, referred to as the "leaseholder", is the one
       that receives and coordinates all read and write requests for the
       range.
     * Under-replicated Ranges: When a cluster is first initialized, the few
       default starting ranges will only have a single replica, but as soon
       as other nodes are available, they will replicate to them until
       they've reached their desired replication factor, the default being 3.
       If a range does not have enough replicas, the range is said to be
       "under-replicated".
     * Unavailable Ranges: If a majority of a range's replicas are on nodes
       that are unavailable, then the entire range is unavailable and will be
       unable to process queries.

   For more details, see Scalable SQL Made Easy: How CockroachDB Automates
   Operations

Dashboard navigation

   Use the Graph menu to display metrics for your entire cluster or for a
   specific node.

   To the right of the Graph and Dashboard menus, a range selector allows you
   to filter the view for a predefined timeframe or custom date/time range.
   Use the navigation buttons to move to the previous, next, or current
   timeframe. Note that the active timeframe is reflected in the URL and can
   be easily shared.

   The Replication dashboard displays the following time series graphs:

Ranges

   CockroachDB Admin UI Replicas per Store

   The Ranges graph shows you various details about the status of ranges.

     * In the node view, the graph shows details about ranges on the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows details about ranges across all
       nodes in the cluster.

   On hovering over the graph, the values for the following metrics are
   displayed:

   Metric             Description                                             
   Ranges             The number of ranges.                                   
                      The number of ranges with leaders. If the number does   
   Leaders            not match the number of ranges for a long time,         
                      troubleshoot your cluster.                              
   Lease Holders      The number of ranges that have leases.                  
                      The number of Raft leaders without leases. If the       
   Leaders w/o Leases number if non-zero for a long time, troubleshoot your   
                      cluster.                                                
   Unavailable        The number of unavailable ranges. If the number if      
                      non-zero for a long time, troubleshoot your cluster.    
   Under-replicated   The number of under-replicated ranges.                  

Logical Bytes per Store

   CockroachDB Admin UI Replicas per Store

   Metric                  Description                                        
                           Number of logical bytes stored in key-value pairs  
   Logical Bytes per Store on each node. This includes historical and deleted 
                           data.                                              

   Note:

   Logical bytes reflect the approximate number of bytes stored in the
   database. This value may deviate from the number of physical bytes on
   disk, due to factors such as compression and write amplification.

Replicas Per Store

   CockroachDB Admin UI Replicas per Store

     * In the node view, the graph shows the number of range replicas on the
       store.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the number of range replicas on
       each store.

   You can Configure replication zones to set the number and location of
   replicas. You can monitor the configuration changes using the Admin UI, as
   described in Fault tolerance and recovery.

Replica Quiescence

   CockroachDB Admin UI Replica Quiescence

     * In the node view, the graph shows the number of replicas on the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the number of replicas across all
       nodes.

   On hovering over the graph, the values for the following metrics are
   displayed:

   Metric    Description                                                    
   Replicas  The number of replicas.                                        
   Quiescent The number of replicas that haven't been accessed for a while. 

Snapshots

   CockroachDB Admin UI Replica Snapshots

   Usually the nodes in a Raft group stay synchronized by following along the
   log message by message. However, if a node is far enough behind the log
   (e.g., if it was offline or is a new node getting up to speed), rather
   than send all the individual messages that changed the range, the cluster
   can send it a snapshot of the range and it can start following along from
   there. Commonly this is done preemptively, when the cluster can predict
   that a node will need to catch up, but occasionally the Raft protocol
   itself will request the snapshot.

   Metric                   Description                                       
   Generated                The number of snapshots created per second.       
   Applied (Raft-initiated) The number of snapshots applied to nodes per      
                            second that were initiated within Raft.           
                            The number of snapshots applied to nodes per      
                            second that were anticipated ahead of time (e.g., 
   Applied (Learner)        because a node was about to be added to a Raft    
                            group). This metric replaces the Applied          
                            (Preemptive) metric in 19.2 and onwards.          
                            The number of snapshots applied to nodes per      
                            second that were anticipated ahead of time (e.g., 
   Applied (Preemptive)     because a node was about to be added to a Raft    
                            group). This metric was used in pre-v19.2         
                            releases and will be removed in future releases.  
   Reserved                 The number of slots reserved per second for       
                            incoming snapshots that will be sent to a node.   

Other graphs

   The Replication dashboard shows other time series graphs that are
   important for CockroachDB developers:

     * Leaseholders per Store
     * Average Queries per Store
     * Range Operations

   For monitoring CockroachDB, it is sufficient to use the Ranges, Replicas
   per Store, and Replica Quiescence graphs.

Summary and events

  Summary panel

   A Summary panel of key metrics is displayed to the right of the timeseries
   graphs.

   CockroachDB Admin UI Summary Panel

   Metric             Description                                             
   Total Nodes        The total number of nodes in the cluster.               
                      Decommissioned nodes are not included in this count.    
   Capacity Used      The storage capacity used as a percentage of usable     
                      capacity allocated across all nodes.                    
   Unavailable Ranges The number of unavailable ranges in the cluster. A      
                      non-zero number indicates an unstable cluster.          
   Queries per second The total number of SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT, and DELETE  
                      queries executed per second across the cluster.         
   P99 Latency        The 99th percentile of service latency.                 

   Note:

   If you are testing your deployment locally with multiple CockroachDB nodes
   running on a single machine (this is not recommended in production), you
   must explicitly set the store size per node in order to display the
   correct capacity. Otherwise, the machine's actual disk capacity will be
   counted as a separate store for each node, thus inflating the computed
   capacity.

  Events panel

   Underneath the Summary panel, the Events panel lists the 5 most recent
   events logged for all nodes across the cluster. To list all events, click
   View all events.

   CockroachDB Admin UI Events

   The following types of events are listed:

     * Database created
     * Database dropped
     * Table created
     * Table dropped
     * Table altered
     * Index created
     * Index dropped
     * View created
     * View dropped
     * Schema change reversed
     * Schema change finished
     * Node joined
     * Node decommissioned
     * Node restarted
     * Cluster setting changed

See also

     * Troubleshooting Overview
     * Support Resources
     * Raw Status Endpoints

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
