   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                               Hardware Dashboard

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   The Hardware dashboard lets you monitor the hardware utilization of your
   cluster. This includes CPU usage, disk throughput, network traffic,
   storage capacity, and memory.

   To view this dashboard, access the Admin UI, click Metrics in the
   left-hand navigation, and select Dashboard > Hardware.

Dashboard navigation

   Use the Graph menu to display metrics for your entire cluster or for a
   specific node.

   To the right of the Graph and Dashboard menus, a range selector allows you
   to filter the view for a predefined timeframe or custom date/time range.
   Use the navigation buttons to move to the previous, next, or current
   timeframe. Note that the active timeframe is reflected in the URL and can
   be easily shared.

   The Hardware dashboard displays the following time series graphs:

CPU Percent

   CockroachDB Admin UI CPU Percent graph

   Note:

   This graph shows the CPU consumption by the CockroachDB process only and
   is useful as long as there are no other processes consuming significant
   CPU on the node. In case you have other processes running on the node, use
   a separate monitoring tool to measure the total CPU consumption across all
   processes.

     * In the node view, the graph shows the percentage of CPU in use by the
       CockroachDB process for the selected node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the percentage of CPU in use by
       the CockroachDB process across all nodes.

   Note:

   For multi-core systems, the percentage of CPU usage is calculated by
   normalizing the CPU usage across all cores, whereby 100% utilization
   indicates that all cores are fully utilized.

Memory Usage

   CockroachDB Admin UI Memory Usage graph

   Note:

   This graph shows the memory consumption by the CockroachDB process only
   and is useful as long as there are no other processes consuming
   significant memory on the node. In case you have other processes running
   on the node, use a separate monitoring tool to measure the total memory
   consumption across all processes.

     * In the node view, the graph shows the memory in use by CockroachDB for
       the selected node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the memory in use by CockroachDB
       across all nodes in the cluster.

Disk Read Bytes

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk Read Bytes graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of bytes read per second by all processes, including CockroachDB, for
       the selected node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of bytes read per second by all processes, including
       CockroachDB, across all nodes.

Disk Write Bytes

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk Write Bytes graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of bytes written per second by all processes, including CockroachDB,
       for the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of bytes written per second by all processes, including
       CockroachDB, across all nodes.

Disk Read Ops

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk Read Ops graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of disk read ops per second for all processes, including CockroachDB,
       for the selected node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of disk read ops per second for all processes, including
       CockroachDB, across all nodes.

Disk Write Ops

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk Write Ops graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of disk write ops per second for all processes, including CockroachDB,
       for the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of disk write ops per second for all processes, including
       CockroachDB, across all nodes.

Disk IOPS in Progress

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk IOPS in Progress graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the number of disk reads and writes
       in queue for all processes, including CockroachDB, for the selected
       node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the number of disk reads and
       writes in queue for all processes, including CockroachDB, across all
       nodes in the cluster.

   Note:

   For Mac OS, this graph is not populated and shows zero disk IOPS in
   progress. This is a known limitation that may be lifted in the future.

Available Disk Capacity

   CockroachDB Admin UI Disk Capacity graph

   Metric                  Description                                        
   Available Disk Capacity Free disk space available to CockroachDB data on   
                           each node.                                         

  Capacity metrics

   The available disk capacity equals the amount of empty disk space, up to
   the value of the maximum store size. The store size is determined as
   follows:

     * If a store size was specified using the --store flag when starting
       nodes, this value is used as the limit for CockroachDB data.
     * If no store size has been explicitly set, the actual disk capacity is
       used as the limit for CockroachDB data.

   The disk usage of the Cockroach binary, operating system, and other system
   files is not shown on the Available Disk Capacity graph.

   Note:

   If you are testing your deployment locally with multiple CockroachDB nodes
   running on a single machine (this is not recommended in production), you
   must explicitly set the store size per node in order to display the
   correct capacity. Otherwise, the machine's actual disk capacity will be
   counted as a separate store for each node, thus inflating the computed
   capacity.

Network Bytes Received

   CockroachDB Admin UI Network Bytes Received graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of network bytes received per second for all processes, including
       CockroachDB, for the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of network bytes received for all processes, including
       CockroachDB, per second across all nodes.

Network Bytes Sent

   CockroachDB Admin UI Network Bytes Sent graph

     * In the node view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the number
       of network bytes sent per second by all processes, including
       CockroachDB, for the node.

     * In the cluster view, the graph shows the 10-second average of the
       number of network bytes sent per second by all processes, including
       CockroachDB, across all nodes.

See also

     * Troubleshooting Overview
     * Support Resources
     * Raw Status Endpoints

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
