   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                              Enterprise Features

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   CockroachDB distributes a single binary that contains both core and
   enterprise features. You can use core features without any license key.
   However, to use the enterprise features, you need either a trial or an
   enterprise license key.

   This page lists enterprise features, and shows you how to obtain and set
   trial and enterprise license keys for CockroachDB.

Enterprise features

   Feature                   Description                                      
                             This feature gives you row-level control of how  
                             and where your data is stored to dramatically    
   Geo-Partitioning          reduce read and write latencies and assist in    
                             meeting regulatory requirements in multi-region  
                             deployments.                                     
                             This feature reduces read latency in             
   Follower Reads            multi-region deployments by using the closest    
                             replica at the expense of reading slightly       
                             historical data.                                 
                             This feature creates full or incremental backups 
                             of your cluster's schema and data that are       
                             consistent as of a given timestamp, stored on a  
                             service such as AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage,    
                             NFS, or HTTP storage.                            
   BACKUP                                                                     
                             Backups can be locality-aware such that each     
                             node writes files only to the backup destination 
                             that matches the node's locality. This is useful 
                             for reducing cloud storage data transfer costs   
                             by keeping data within cloud regions and         
                             complying with data domiciling requirements.     
   RESTORE                   This feature restores your cluster's schemas and 
                             data from an enterprise BACKUP.                  
                             This feature provides efficient, distributed,    
   Change Data Capture (CDC) row-level change feeds into Apache Kafka for     
                             downstream processing such as reporting,         
                             caching, or full-text indexing.                  
                             This feature visualizes the geographical         
   Node Map                  configuration of a cluster by plotting node      
                             localities on a world map.                       
                             Given multiple identical indexes that have       
                             different locality constraints using replication 
                             zones, the cost-based optimizer will prefer the  
   Locality-Aware Index      index that is closest to the gateway node that   
   Selection                 is planning the query. In multi-region           
                             deployments, this can lead to performance        
                             improvements due to improved data locality and   
                             reduced network traffic.                         
                             Supplementing CockroachDB's encryption in flight 
                             capabilities, this feature provides transparent  
   Encryption at Rest        encryption of a node's data on the local disk.   
                             It allows encryption of all files on disk using  
                             AES in counter mode, with all key sizes allowed. 
                             CockroachDB supports the Generic Security        
   GSSAPI with Kerberos      Services API (GSSAPI) with Kerberos              
   Authentication            authentication, which lets you use an external   
                             enterprise directory system that supports        
                             Kerberos, such as Active Directory.              
                             This feature uses the CockroachDB distributed    
   EXPORT                    execution engine to quickly get large sets of    
                             data out of CockroachDB in a CSV format that can 
                             be ingested by downstream systems.               

Types of licenses

   Type               Description                                             
   Trial License      A trial license enables you to try out CockroachDB      
                      enterprise features for 30 days for free.               
                      A paid enterprise license enables you to use            
   Enterprise License CockroachDB enterprise features for longer periods (one 
                      year or more).                                          

   Tip:

   For quick local testing of Enterprise features, you can use the cockroach
   demo command, which starts a temporary, in-memory cluster with a SQL shell
   open and a trial license applied automatically.

Obtain a license

   To obtain a trial license, fill out the registration form and receive your
   trial license via email within a few minutes.

   To upgrade to an enterprise license, contact Sales.

Set a license

   As the CockroachDB root user, open the built-in SQL shell in insecure or
   secure mode, as per your CockroachDB setup. In the following example, we
   assume that CockroachDB is running in insecure mode. Then use the SET
   CLUSTER SETTING command to set the name of your organization and the
   license key:

   copy

 $ cockroach sql --insecure

   copy

 >  SET CLUSTER SETTING cluster.organization = 'Acme Company';

   copy

 >  SET CLUSTER SETTING enterprise.license = 'xxxxxxxxxxxx';

Verify a license

   To verify a license, open the built-in SQL shell and use the SHOW CLUSTER
   SETTING command to check the organization name and license key:

   copy

 >  SHOW CLUSTER SETTING cluster.organization;

   cluster.organization
 +----------------------+
   Acme Company
 (1 row)

   copy

 >  SHOW CLUSTER SETTING enterprise.license;

              enterprise.license
 +-------------------------------------------+
   crl-0-ChB1x...
 (1 row)

   The license setting is also logged in the cockroach.log on the node where
   the command is run:

   copy

 $ cat cockroach.log | grep license

 I171116 18:11:48.279604 1514 sql/event_log.go:102  [client=[::1]:56357,user=root,n1] Event: "set_cluster_setting", target: 0, info: {SettingName:enterprise.license Value:xxxxxxxxxxxx User:root}

Renew an expired license

   After your license expires, the enterprise features stop working, but your
   production setup is unaffected. For example, the backup and restore
   features would not work until the license is renewed, but you would be
   able to continue using all other features of CockroachDB without
   interruption.

   To renew an expired license, contact Sales and then set the new license.

See also

     * SET CLUSTER SETTING
     * SHOW CLUSTER SETTING
     * Enterprise Trial –– Get Started

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
