   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                        Enterprise Trial –– Get Started

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   Congratulations on starting your CockroachDB Enterprise Trial! With it,
   you'll not only get access to CockroachDB's core capabilities like high
   availability and SERIALIZABLE isolation, but also our Enterprise-only
   features like distributed BACKUP & RESTORE, geo-partitioning, and cluster
   visualization.

Install CockroachDB

   If you haven't already, you'll need to locally install, remotely deploy,
   or orchestrate CockroachDB.

Enable Enterprise features

   As the CockroachDB root user, open the built-in SQL shell in insecure or
   secure mode, as per your CockroachDB setup. In the following example, we
   assume that CockroachDB is running in insecure mode.

   copy

 $ cockroach sql --insecure

   Note:

   If you've secured your deployment, you'll need to include the flags for
   your certificates instead of the --insecure flag.

   Now, use the SET CLUSTER SETTING command to set the name of your
   organization and the license key:

   copy

 >  SET CLUSTER SETTING cluster.organization = 'Acme Company'; SET CLUSTER SETTING enterprise.license = 'xxxxxxxxxxxx';

   Then verify your organization in response to the following query:

   copy

 >  SHOW CLUSTER SETTING cluster.organization;

Use Enterprise features

   Your cluster now has access to all of CockroachDB's enterprise features
   for the length of the trial:

   Feature                   Description                                      
                             This feature gives you row-level control of how  
                             and where your data is stored to dramatically    
   Geo-Partitioning          reduce read and write latencies and assist in    
                             meeting regulatory requirements in multi-region  
                             deployments.                                     
                             This feature reduces read latency in             
   Follower Reads            multi-region deployments by using the closest    
                             replica at the expense of reading slightly       
                             historical data.                                 
                             This feature creates full or incremental backups 
                             of your cluster's schema and data that are       
                             consistent as of a given timestamp, stored on a  
                             service such as AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage,    
                             NFS, or HTTP storage.                            
   BACKUP                                                                     
                             Backups can be locality-aware such that each     
                             node writes files only to the backup destination 
                             that matches the node's locality. This is useful 
                             for reducing cloud storage data transfer costs   
                             by keeping data within cloud regions and         
                             complying with data domiciling requirements.     
   RESTORE                   This feature restores your cluster's schemas and 
                             data from an enterprise BACKUP.                  
                             This feature provides efficient, distributed,    
   Change Data Capture (CDC) row-level change feeds into Apache Kafka for     
                             downstream processing such as reporting,         
                             caching, or full-text indexing.                  
                             This feature visualizes the geographical         
   Node Map                  configuration of a cluster by plotting node      
                             localities on a world map.                       
                             Given multiple identical indexes that have       
                             different locality constraints using replication 
                             zones, the cost-based optimizer will prefer the  
   Locality-Aware Index      index that is closest to the gateway node that   
   Selection                 is planning the query. In multi-region           
                             deployments, this can lead to performance        
                             improvements due to improved data locality and   
                             reduced network traffic.                         
                             Supplementing CockroachDB's encryption in flight 
                             capabilities, this feature provides transparent  
   Encryption at Rest        encryption of a node's data on the local disk.   
                             It allows encryption of all files on disk using  
                             AES in counter mode, with all key sizes allowed. 
                             CockroachDB supports the Generic Security        
   GSSAPI with Kerberos      Services API (GSSAPI) with Kerberos              
   Authentication            authentication, which lets you use an external   
                             enterprise directory system that supports        
                             Kerberos, such as Active Directory.              
                             This feature uses the CockroachDB distributed    
   EXPORT                    execution engine to quickly get large sets of    
                             data out of CockroachDB in a CSV format that can 
                             be ingested by downstream systems.               

Getting help

   If you or your team need any help during your trial, our engineers are
   available on CockroachDB Community Slack, our forum, or GitHub.

See also

     * Enterprise Licensing
     * SET CLUSTER SETTING
     * SHOW CLUSTER SETTING

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
