   Link: canonical
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us
   Cockroach Labs
   Products
   Products CockroachDB CockroachCloud Compare Products Pricing
   Capabilities SQL Scale Resilience Geo-Partitioning Cloud Native
   Customers
   Learn
   Docs University
   Resources
   Guides Videos & Webinars Partners Forum
   Blog Get CockroachDB Contact Us

                     MovR: An Example Multi-Region Use-Case

   Contribute 
     * Edit This Page
     * Report Doc Issue
     * Suggest New Content

   This page walks you through an example use case for multi-region
   application development and deployment. It is the first section of the
   Develop and Deploy a Multi-Region Web Application tutorial.

Overview

   MovR is a fictional company that offers users a platform for sharing
   vehicles, like scooters, bicycles, and skateboards, in select cities
   across the United States and Europe. To serve users in two continents,
   they need an application that is globally available, resilient to system
   failures, and optimized for latency. To meet these requirements, the
   application is built on CockroachDB, and designed and deployed to consider
   resiliency and latency across different geographic locations.

Resiliency and distributed deployments

   For an application to be resilient to system failures, the application
   server and database need to be deployed on multiple machines (i.e., part
   of a distributed deployment). In distributed CockroachDB deployments, all
   data is replicated and distributed across the instances of the database
   that make up the deployment. For more information about data replication
   and distribution in CockroachDB, see The Raft Protocol in CockroachDB.

   The replication and distribution of data across multiple machines in a
   single region makes the deployment resilient to individual node failures
   within the region. Replication and distribution across multiple regions
   makes the deployment resilient to regional failures. To make the database
   resilient to regional failures, use a multi-region deployment.

   Note:

   In the example deployment, the application and the database deployments
   are separate and not co-located on the same machine.

Latency in global applications

   If the MovR application and database are deployed in a single region,
   latency can be a serious problem for users located in cities outside the
   deployment region. However, deploying the application and database in
   multiple regions will not improve latency if client requests are sent to
   any server in the deployment, without consideration for the client's
   location.

   Limiting latency improves the user experience, and it can also help avoid
   problems with data integrity, like transaction contention. For the purpose
   of this tutorial, we'll focus on two types of latency:

     * Database latency, which we define as the time required to complete
       database operations.
     * Application latency, which we define as the time required to make
       requests to an application server.

  Database latency

   To reduce database latency in a distributed CockroachDB deployment, data
   can be geo-partitioned. Geo-partitioning enables you to control where
   specific rows of data are stored. Limiting database operations to specific
   partitions can reduce the distance requests need to travel between the
   client and the database.

   Note:

   Geo-partitioned replicas can dramatically improve latency in multi-region
   deployments, but at the cost of resiliency. Geo-partitioned replicas are
   resilient to availability zone failures, but not regional failures.

   If you are building an application, it's likely that the end user will not
   be making requests to the database directly. Instead, the user makes
   requests to the application, and the application makes requests to the
   database on behalf of the user. To limit the latency between the
   application and the database, you need to design and deploy your
   application such that:

     * Each instance of the application communicates with the closest
       database instance. This can be configured during the deployment. Later
       in the tutorial, in the multi-region deployment steps, we walk you
       through configuring the application to communicate with the database
       closest to it.
     * The application's database operations query relevant, geo-partitioned
       data. To do this, the application must be aware of the client's
       location. This requires the load balancer to pass client location
       information to the application. We cover configuring custom HTTP
       headers for client location in the application deployment steps. We
       also discuss handling client location server-side in Developing a
       Multi-Region Web Application.

  Application latency

   To limit the latency between client and application server requests, you
   need to deploy your application such that requests are routed to the
   application deployment closest to the client. This requires a global load
   balancer that can redirect traffic to application deployments, based on
   client location. We cover setting up a multi-cluster ingress in the
   multi-region application deployment steps.

   In the sections that follow, we cover some best practices in database
   schema creation with an example database. We also cover some basics for
   developing a locality-aware, global application.

Next steps

   You should now be ready to start creating a multi-region database schema.

See also

     * movr-flask on GitHub
     * CockroachDB terminology
     * Configure Replication Zones
     * Define Table Partitions
     * Topology Patterns
     * Geo-Partitioned Replicas Topology

   Was this page helpful?

   Yes No
     * Product
          * CockroachDB
          * CockroachCloud
          * Compare
          * Pricing
          * What's New
          * Get CockroachDB
          * Sign In
     * Resources
          * Guides
          * Videos & Webinars
          * Architecture Overview
          * FAQ
          * Security
     * Learn
          * Docs
          * University
     * Support Channels
          * Forum
          * Slack
          * Support Portal
          * Contact Us
     * Company
          * About
          * Blog
          * Careers
          * Customers
          * Events
          * News
          * Privacy
   © 2020 Cockroach Labs
   Thank you for downloading CockroachDB
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
   Keep up-to-date with CockroachDB software releases and usage best
   practices
